Germany and the COVID-19 long term care situation Germany and the COVID-19 long term care situation Klara Lorenz Dant London School of Economics and Political Science.
This document be available through the , set up in March 2020 a a rapidly share collection of resource for community and institution based longterm care response to COVID-19.
The be hosted by CPEC at the London School of Economics and Political Science and dra on the resource of the International Long Term Care Policy Net .
This document last up date on 26 May 2020 and may be subject to revision.
Acknoments The author like to thank Adelina Comas Herrera and John Lorenz Dant for their feedback on preliminary version of this report.
Germany and the COVID-19 long term care situation 21.
Key point The German government have issue financial support and loosen monitoring for care provider during th be pandemic so that the residential and ambulatory care that people receive can be maintain .
As part of this approach, long term care insurance reimburse institution provide care that incur additional cost or loss of revenue due to the COVID -19 outbreak.
The German government have announce an increase in care ™ .
In addition, care across Germany receive a one-off bonus .
The German government have extend exist support for people care need and their unpaid carers .
Residential care setting across Germany have start to allow their resident to have visitors.
The care setting must develop and implement complex safety protection plan to facilitate this.
The Robert Koch Institute (RKI) provide regularly update gu idance , recommendation and advice for specific care settings.
This include the establishment of zone to physically separate resident during outbreak and contact tracing.
The R KI issue a daily update on the number of confirmed and recover COVID -19 ca ses a a of the nu mber of COVID -19 relate deaths.
There be a lack of information and advice regard the care of people live dementia .
Impact of COVID19 Number of positive case in population and death The Robert Koch Institute (RKI) mon itors infectious and non -communicable disease in Germany.
It also conduct research and advise relevant ministries, especially the Ministry of Health.
The RKI be involve in the development of guideline and norms.
According to their daily update (as of 25 May 2020), there have be 178,570 confirmed case of COVID -19 in Germany (an increase of 289 in comparison to the day before).
Of the confirm cases, 19% in people age 70 year or older.
Out of all confirm case an estimate 161,200 have recove red and 8,257 people ( %) have died.
Of those have died, 86% of people age 70 or old .
The RKI estimate that the 7-day reproduction number for Germany on 25 May 2020.
The mean that on average every person a COVID-19 infection inf ects one other person and that the number of ne infected people be sho a small reduction.
Population -level measur e to contain spread of COVID-19 From 23 March until 20 April 2020 a ban on public assembly have be in place across Germany an effort to slow the spread of the infection.
Gatherings of more than people, few exceptions, forbidden.
This do not apply to family and person in Germany and the COVID-19 long term care situation 3 live in the same household.
In addition, restaurant and business for body care haird dressers, cosmetic studios have to close .
The Federal State of Bavaria ha d enforce a curfew from 20 March 2020 (starting at midnight) until 5 May 2020 2.
On 27 March 2020, the Federal Council (Bundesrat) agree to the new legislation on the protection of the population during an epidemic situation of national significance (Gesetz zum Schutz der Bevölkerung bei einer epidemischen Lage von nationaler Trag ) that have pass the German lo chamber (Bundestag) on 25 March 2020 .
The law alter the usual organisation and competence of the Federal Ministry of Health (Bundesministerium für Gesundheit) by allo it to declare an ‚epidemic situation of national significance.
This declaration enable the Federal Ministry of Health to issue regulation and bill concern the basic supply of medication, include narcotics, medical product s, laboratory diagnostics, aids, protective equipment and product for disinfection, and to increase healthcare resource (personnel) require approval from the Federal Council (Bundesrat).
The German lo chamber and the Federal Council can ask to cancel this law and the federal government be require to rescind these special po as soon a they be longer required.
Measures take under the epidemic situation law to respond to the epidemic then lose their validity .
It be understood that declare an epidemic situation of national significance override s the authority of the federal state that be usually in charge of manage infectious diseases.
As of 1 April 2020, the RKI change it advice and recommend ed the of mouth -nose protection (community non -medical masks) in public.
The of community mask be recommend in situation the protective distance cannot al be maintain (such a in shops).
The institute maintain that the best to protect oneself and others from an infection COVID -19 be good hand hygiene, adhere to rule regard coughing and sneezing and to keep a distance of at least meter from others .
The district (Landkreise) Jena and Nordhausen City (Stadt) the first to make the of a cover of mouth and nose mandatory in shops, public transport and official building (.
By 22 April 2020 all federal state have move from recommend the of mouth -nose protection in public to announce their mandatory use in public transport shop and in some state also on markets.
This include Baden Württemberg, Bavaria, Berlin, Brandenburg, Bremen, Hamburg, Hessen, Mecklenburg Western Pomerania , Lo Saxony, North Rhine Westphalia , Rhineland Palatinate, Saarland, Saxony , Saxony -Anhalt, Schles Holstein and Thuringia .
On 20 April 2020, Chancellor Merkel announce that the Federal Ministry of Health finance the training of mobile team that be establish to support the local health aut horities contact trace .
The aim be to establish a 5 person contact trace team for every 20,000 resident .
These team be host in the health authority and be support by police officers.
The people employ on the contract trace team have start receive online training since 6 April 2020.
After that they receive train specific to the context of the health aut hority to they be deploy .
In addition, a service unit at the RKI be establish to enable a continuous point of contact for local health authority .
2Germany and the COVID-19 long term care situation 4 From 20 April on first step take to lift some restrictions.
In many federal states shop start to open.
At the beginning of May next step take to prepare to the opening of playground, museums, zoo and place of and some federal state ease s ome of the contact restrictions.
In early May agreement make to loosen some contact restriction and to enable the opening of restaurant and cafes.
Since mid -May border bet Germany, Austria, S and France have start open up again.
34 Some contact restriction a a hygiene and distancing rule can be expect to remain in place until 5 June and large event be prohibit until 31 August.
On 19 May the second bill on the protection of the population during an epidemic situation of national significance (z Gesetz zum Schutz der Bevölkerung bei einer epidemischen Lage von nationaler Trag ) enact .
It contain a number of measure to enable more testing and to detect infectious chain early, to financially recognise care , to support people care need receive domiciliary and unpaid care, to support public health services, to offer more flexibility for apprentice and student in the health sector, to offer more flexibility and less b ureaucracy for the in sured, administration and health service and to offer more solidarity European neighbours.
6 Rates of infection and mortality among long -term care user and staff On 21 May 2020 the RKI report that 15,757 resident and 8,935 sta ff confirm COVID -19 infection have be record in care settings.
These number include the number of case in care set for old people, people special needs, people care needs, homeless people, people live in residence for asylum seekers, other for m of mass accommodation and prisons.
Among this group, 3,138 resident and 46 member of staff have be report to have die .
The number of staff that die in care setting be high than that of staff in health care setting .
The RKI also record COVID -19 case among heal th care staff.
Of the confirm cases, 12,393 people (73% female, 27% male) in hospitals, doctors™ surgeries, dialysis centres, ambulatory care service or in the ambulance service.
The report median age for this group be 41 year .
There 20 COVID -19 related death record among health care .
How ever, information be miss from around 29% of record cases.
This mean that the true number of people infect COVID -19 and those that have die a a result of the infection in health and long -term care setting may be higher.
7 There be no informa tion available about how many people in receipt of community -based care, or their unpaid or pay carers have be infect or how many have die Over the last couple of month several outbreak of COVID -19 in care and nursing home across Germany have be report in the medium .
Germany and the COVID -19 long -term care situation 5 programme FAKT (television) at least 520 nursing home across Germany have be affect by COVID -19 infections.
This information be base on a survey the journalist conduct among Ministries of Healt h across the 16 federal states. 
No information could be obtain from Saarland and Saxony Anhalt.
Brief background to the long -term care system Germany have a population of million.
In 2018, million people age 65 year and old (22% of the population) .
According to the German Federal Statistical Office (Destatis), in 2017 there million people long -term care needs, 63% .
The majority of people th long -term care needs, a in many other countries, receive support in their o home (76%).
Of those receive support at home , 68% do so from unpaid family carers and 32% receive (additional) support through one of the 14,100 ambulatory care providers.
Most of the people receive care at home be register a have moderate care level (levels 2 to 3).
Destatis estimate that 818,289 (24%) people long term care need live in Germany™s 14,500 care and nursing homes.
Most people live in institut ional care setting have moderate to considerable care need (levels 3 to 4) .
Support for long term care need be organise through care provider and finance largely through the long -term care insurance that every German, irrespective of they be insure through a sickness fund or through a private provider, have to pay.
People long term care need can decide they prefer financial in kind support.
The mai n goal of the insurance system be to enable people care need to live a self -determined life.
Ho the long-term care insurance usually do not cover all care relate costs.
This be people long-term care need experience out -of-pocket expenditure .
In the German long-term care system care need be classify into five categories, range from low (level 1) to severe need (level 5).
People be assign to t he different category follo an assessment of six core area of living (mobility, cognitive and communicative abilities, behaviour and psychological issues, ability to take care for oneself independently , handle of illness and therapy a a ill ness relate strain, and therapy and organisation of everyday life and of social contacts) .
The care need must persist over at least six months.
Depending on their level of need people receive different level of support .
Long-Term Care policy and practice measure Whole sector measure .Funding package by the federal government On 27 March the German Ministry of H ealth (Bundesgesundheitsministerium) announce a funding and support package to help care institution during the COVID-19 pandemic.
The measure outline include: Suspensio n of quality assessment for a mbulatory and residential care a a change to assessment and of obligatory advisory visit to people care needs.
Long -term care insurance reimburse institution provide care that incur additional cost or loss of revenue due to the COVID-19 outbreak.
In order to maintain the provi sion of care, institutional care setting be allo to deviate from certain rule and operational frame around staff level.
The care insurance provider additionally support provider to avoid gap in supply of pay home care .
Where c be provider (ambulatory and residential) be no longer able to meet the service they be due to provide they have to contact the care insurances immediately and search for alternative in collaboration health and regulatory authority to ensure that people™s care need can be meet in .
On 3 March, the National Association of Statutory Health Insurance Funds (GKV Spitzenverband) issue a statement on the rescue package to support care provider during the pandemic.
Besides outline the different component of the new legislation, the association also provide information on estimate costs.
According to health ministry estimate , the association expect to spend approximately an additional 10 per month per person care need for protective equipment.
Assuming additional cost for seven month for four million people care needs, this result in an additional cost of 280 million.
The association state that c osts for additional carers for amb ulatory care and care in residential setting cannot be estimate yet .
In the example provided, the monthly cost of an additional care assistant in an institutional setting for the employer be estimate to be around 2,200, the cost of a qualified carer in an ambulatory care set be estimate to be 3,300.
It cannot be predict how many additional carers and care assistant be likely to be required.
In addition, the National Association of Statutory Health Insurance Funds outline how people h care need can be support in case s the usual ambulatory care or replacement care cannot be provided.
The document state that the cost of support through other people can be reimburse for up to three months.
In the first example provided, a care recipient (care level 5) usually receive care through an ambulatory care provider and direct family support receive support from an emplo yee of a temporarily close day care institution.
The care recipient can claim up to 1,995 to cover the cost of the replacement support.
The second example describe the situation of a person care level 2 usually receive care from her daughter from an ambulatory care provider.
The care recipient receive direct payment (60%) and in -kind support (40%).
In this hypothetical case, the ambulatory care provider be unable to provide in Germany and the COVID-19 long-term care situation 7 it service due to quarantine or illness of the carer and the daughter be unable to step up her care commitment due to employment.
A neighbour step in to provide the 40% the ambulatory service have covered.
The neighbour in this case can bill the care insurance for support she or he have be provide for up to 275 (40% in -kind support).
9 Thuringia and Berlin be start an initiative to increase the basic security pay for people in need.
This recognise that people that usually rely on support of food bank and other supportive intervention cannot acce s these services, may make life even more expensive.
This top -up benefit people of all ages.
Schles-Holstein support the ir health authority 5 million over the next 12 month .
This should enable the recruitment of 100 new member of staff .
The additional staff member could support contact trace activities.
Improvin g care ' On 23 April the German government announce minimum for nursing assistant be increase from 1 May 2020 to 1 April 2022 in four step until they reach 12, 55 across Germany.
Qualified assistant that have undergo a one -year apprenticeship receive a minimum of 12,50 (West) or 12,20 (East) a of 1 April 2021.
From 1 April 2022 minimum across Germany for this group be 13,20.
For care three -year apprenticeship minimum be 15 a of 1 April 2021.
This increase to 15,40 by 1 April 2022.
In addition to the vacation day be legally entitle to, all care receive additional pay day off .
Other funding relate measure The Bavarian Minister for Health and Care and the Bavarian Minister of Finance announce that the catering for all staff in health and care set (hospital, care or nursing homes) be financially support (per member of staff per day) a a sign of appreciation of their role in respond to the pandemic (as of 1 April 2020) .
On 7 April 2020, it report the Bavarian cabinet have decide that around 250,000 pay carers in care and nursing home a a in care settings for people special need receive a single payment of 500 (tax -free) in recognition of the they have be provide during the pandemic.
This cost the federal state of Bavaria 126 million .
As part of the updated measures, the Bavarian Ministr y for Health and Care announce that care in care and nursing homes, hospitals, rehabilitation hospitals, care setting for people special needs, ambulatory care service and ambulance staf f regularly more than 25 hour per can apply to receive 500 .
Those regularly 25 hour or fe per can apply to receive 300.
This money come out of a special fond put together to respond to COVID -19 .
The trade union VER DI report on 6 April 2020 that follo meeting the federal association of employer in the care industry (Bundesvereinigung der Arbeitgeber in der Pflegebranche (BVAP) they have agree on key point for a special payment for care. 
Germany and the COVID-19 long-term care situation 8 in intitutional long-term care setting and ambulatory care to reflect the additional burden during the pandemic.
According to this agreement, the party have agree that full-time staff should receive a single payment of an additional 1,500 a part of their Jul y pay.
Part -time should receive the premium proportional to their hour and apprentice should receive 900.
The organisation continue to the implementation of this plan .
The second law for the protection of the po pulation during an epidemic situation of national significance (z Gesetz zum Schutz der Bevölkerung bei einer epidemischen Lage von nationaler Trag ) , accept on 14 May include financial recognition of staff in residential and ambulat ory care setting: All people employ in old age care be able to make a staggered claim on a one -off bonus payment (Corona -Prämie) of up to 1,000.
The high bonus payment be make to full -time staff provide direct care and support.
Apprentice s, people provide voluntary services, during their voluntary social year a gency and in service company shall receive a bonus payment.
The social care insurance reimburse employer for the bonus initially.
During the second half 2020 the Federal Ministry of Health (Bundesministerium für Gesundheit) and the Federal Ministry of Finance (Bundesministerium für Finanzen) decide over the extent of a government grant for health and care insurance to enable the stabilisation of the contribution rate.
The federal state and employer in care can increase the one -off bonus up to the tax and social security tax free amount of •1,500 .12 The federal state of Saarland (13 May), Hamburg (14 May) , Rhineland -Palatinate (19 May) and S chles -Holstein announce to increase the one -off carer bonus to up to •1,500 .
13 14 15 (see Anne x) Care coordination issue .1 Hospital discharge to the community General criterion for the discharge from hospital into community setting have be provide by the RKI.
People can be discharg ed into isolation at home , follo medical assessment, ambulatory support can be provide and if they meet relevant criterion.
medical assessment conclude mild degree of illness, person do not fall into group at risk of complications, such immunosuppression, relevant chronic illnesses, old age, can care for themselves, can adhere to recommend behaviours
Germany and the COVID -19 long -term care situation 9 possibility to stay in single room that can be aired, ambulatory medical support available , contact to local health authority, availabili ty of support from a health person ( risk factors)) 16 .
Discharge further restriction be possible if the patient have not have relevant symptom for at 48 hour and have t negative test ( one oropharyngeal, one nasopharyngeal ) take at the sam e time.
Hospital discharge to residential and nursing home People long -term care need have be live in care or nursing home or those that require care in residential setting follo hospitalisation pose the great care coordination c hallenge.
Due to the vulnerability of resident live in care and nursing homes, a outlined above, many care home provider fear an outbreak.
Some large care homes, such a a care home in Kiel, have free up short -term space specifically for people dis charge from hospital.
Ho , the isolation of resident follo hospitalisation pose challenge for small institution .
The RKI outline the fo llo criterion for hospital discharge in nurse home (updated version from 20 May 2020).
First, there have to have be clinical improvement that , base on medical assessment , allo for continued ambulatory support in isolation in the care home a a a requirement that the environment in the patient be look after be appropriate.
Patients discharge from hospital into a care home can only be release from isolation in the care home after at least 14 day follo hospital discharge , and if the patient have be free of COVID -19 relate symptom for at least 48 hours.
A medical consultation for this decision be required.
If patient be be discharge from hospital they only do not have to quarantine in nursing home if they have be free of COVID -19 relate symptom for at least 48 hour and have 2 negative polymerase chain reaction (PCR) test ( one oropharyngeal, one nasopharyngeal ) take at the same time.
18 Most federal state have allo care home to continue to receive new resid ents and resident discharge from hospital if they follow regulation and guideline in line the RKI recommendation outline above.
An overview of the specific response by the different Federal States can be find in the Annex.
.3 Admission of new resident from the community The RKI recommend that care home should coordinate the admission of new resident from the community the relevant health authority.
Recommendations for asymptomatic person : People w ithout any symptom of COVID -19 should ideally be isolate in the care home for 14 but at least for 7 days.
If the person develop symptom of COVID -19 test should take place as soon a possible .
Even for asymptomatic , people test for COVID -19 be rec ommended.
Particularly to the end 16 17 18 | Germany and the COVID -19 long -term care situation 10 of the incubation period a test should be able to pick up an infection in an asymptomatic person.
19 Care home (including support living, residential and nursing homes, skilled nursing facilities) The high risk of infection to people live in care and nursing home have be recognise and different body across Germany have issue guidance and recommendations.
.1 Prevention of COVID19 infection The late update of the recommendation regard prevention and mana gement of COVID -19 in long -term care setting for old people and people special need by the RKI (as of 20 may 2020) recommends that the manager of care home and the relevant health authority together to develop a COVID -19 plan .
This plan sho uld follow the regulation issue by the relevant state government (Landesregierung) in each federal state .
Aspects that should be consider in the development of the plan include: Putting together a team designate responsibility for specific areas (hygiene, communication, acquisition of materials) Informing residents, their relative and staff of relevant protective measure
Informing and train staff regard the use of protective measure and equipment Training of all staff, especially cleaner , in hygiene, physical distancing and other relevant procedure Organising measure to reduce the number of contact the institutional setting Setting and implement rule for visitor and external provider s (.
hair dressers, chiropodis ts, physiotherapists, people in pastoral capacity) Under specific circumstance , and in collaboration the relevant health authority , care setting can impose a ban to take on new residents.
If possible, provide alternative for communication Implementing r egulations around staff absence Small group of designated resident should be organise for activity that need to be do collectively.
This reduce the number of contact in case of a COVID -19 infection.
Staff should , if possible, in designated, ind ependent teams.
The updated document far provide detailed information on hygiene measure a a for infection control in residential care settings.
Basic hygiene rules, include hand hygiene (hand before and after preparin g meals, before eating, after use the toilet, after have be outside, after touch jointly use surface (.
This incl udes adhere to cough and sneeze rules, people should avoid touch their fac es (especially mouth and nose), remain physical distancing (-2m), reduce contact others (residents, visitors) All staff direct contact to particularly vulnerable people should be mouth-nose protection to protect patients, even n they be not engage in direct care task .
Germany and the COVID -19 long -term care situation 11 In addition, caring for people at risk display respiratory symptoms, the person care for should also mouth nose protection , if tolerable .
Furthermore , a number of recommendation have be make r egarding the provision of single use tissues, location of bins, type of disinfectant to be used, daily disinfection routine and medical equipment.
The RKI also provide recommendation around preventative measure for care : The health status of s taff should be monitor daily.
Staff should monitor their o health and inform management if they experience relevant symptoms.
Leave of staff due to respiratory symptoms, a confirmed COVID -19 infection or due to follo contact th an infected person should be recorded.
There should be a low threshold for test of care and nursing home staff and testing should be do delay.
If there be sufficient test capacity it could be consider in collaboration the local health authority to regularly test staff ( or more frequently) .
In high risk institution (very large care setting dense occ upancy or in region high COVID -19 incidence) the possibility for regular ( or more frequently) testing before shift commences should be explore 20 While the RKI offer information base on epidemiological studies, bind guideline and directi ves, a a recommendations, be provide by the ministry responsible for health and by the Landesgesundheitsämter (health authorities) in each of the 16 federal region ( Bundesländer ).
From 2 April ban on visitor to care and nurse home put in place in many federal states.
These include Baden -Württemberg , Bremen, Brandenburg, Hamburg, Mecklenburg -Western Pomerania, Rhineland -Palatinate, Saxony, Saxony -Anhalt, Schles -Holstein and Thuringia .
Berlin operate d under more relaxed ru le .
From May 2020 all federal state lift some of the restriction and enabled people live in residential care setting to have some visitor (see .2).
An overview of response implement during the full closure of residential care setting by Fed eral States can be find in the Anne x.
Controlling spread once infection be suspect or have enter a facility In the extended advice document (as of 20 May 2020 ) the RKI provide information on measure regard space and personnel in care home .
Residents that have test positive or a re suspect of have COVID -19, resident symptom and their contact should be move into single rooms, ideally their o room.
These resident must not participate in activity resident that have test negative.
Germany and the COVID -19 long -term care situation 12 If there be evidence of COVID -19 in an institution, the institution (space and staff) should be separate into three area : one area for those symptom and contact affected people ; one area for those suspected case ( resident sho symptom or have be in close contact infect residents) have not yet have test results; and one area for people have test positive for COVID -19.
The guidance state that shou ld additional infectious disease be prevalent (.
influenza) , additional area need to be established.
Staff should only be in one of the designate areas.
Staff support resident suspect and confirm case should be train and not b e ask to care for others .
Staff care for resident suspect and confirm case should personal protective equipment include mouth -nose protection or preferably FFP2 masks, protective go , safety goggles and single use gloves.
For all act ivities that involve aerosol production breathe mask (FFP2 or higher) should be .
Personal protective equipment should be put on before enter the room of the resident and take off before leave the designate decontamination area or the residen t™s room.
Protective equipment and information for it use should be place immediately at the entrance to live quarter .
Due to the experience of asymptomatic case it should be consider for staff on an affect by a COVID -19 outbreak to per sonal protective equipment .
It be recommend to expand hygienic measure early across the .
Bins for the disposal of single -use equipment should be place on the inside by the door .
Single use glove should be dispose of before leave the ro om into a closed container .
There be also guidance regard hand hygiene and the type of disinfectant to be used.
The document far describe procedure for the cleaning and disinfection of the surround environment ( .
surfaces) , of medical produc ts, cro ckery, mat tress , bed and laundry a a for disposal .
Information on strategy to protect resident should be make available to staff, resident and their visitor .
The guidance document also provide specific advice for move resi dent infect COVID -19 a a outside the institutional care setting : The destination should be inform regard the arrival ahead of time (if this be an external transfer the receiving institution be to be inform about the suspected /confirmed COVID -19 infection) .
Only one person should be transported, and the person should mouth -nose protection as far a their health status allo for this.
Contact other resident or visitor should be avoided.
The mean of transport a well a other contact surface should be disinfect immediately after transport.
Germany and the COVID -19 long -term care situation 13 The RKI document emphasise that currently there be no confirmed evidence people COVID -19 stop be infectious .
22 The institutions hygiene expert in collaboration the company doctor and the health authority should also inform and train medical staff on the correct use of protective equipment and self -monitoring of symptoms.
They should ideally exempt staff provide care for COVID -19 case from care for othe r patients/ care recipient and centrally document result of the self -monitoring of symptom and record test result (if applicable) obtain 14 day of contact to the confirm case.
The health authority should be inform about expose staff.
Sho uld a member of staff develop symptom they should immediately stop duty and possible situation of exposure should be explored.
The health authority need to be provide the name of the affected member of staff and the relevant person should be self -isolating until there be diagnostic clarity of their situation (availability of test results) .
Medic staff confirm COVID -19 case be encourage to maintain a diary in they record self -checking of symptom (examples of diary be available on the RKI 23 ).
Medical staff should also immediately inform the company doctor and the health authority if they have be expose adequate protective equipment or realise that protective measure impaired.
Depending on juent of risk it may be appropriate to self-isolate at home.
Contact tracing and test in residential care settings The RKI guideline also recommend contact tracing of contact person s in cooperation the local health authority.
Successful contact tra cing enable the interruption of infectious chains.
Contact tracing of COVID -19 case in care or nursing home be to be prioritised.
The Robert Koch Institute have provide an overview for contact tracing in the case of COVID -19 infection.
The local healt h authority have to be inform about each suspected and confirmed case of COVID - The health authority be the responsible for cont act the person , identify ing potential contacts, provid ing them information and establishing preventive measures. The RKI recommend s that all contact a COVID -19 case have have until up to the day before symptom begin should be listed.
These contact be categorise into category 1 category 2 and category 3 .
Category 1 contact be people that have cumulatively be e xposed to at least 15 minute face -to-face contact or there have be direct contact of secretion or body fluid of the infected person (for medical and care person nel exposure protective equipment) .
These contact be deem a at high risk o f have be infected.
Their detail be register the health authority and there be a follow -up investigation.
Germany and the COVID -19 long -term care situation 14 Category 1 contact be ask to isolate at home a from other household members, to maintain frequent hand and cou ghing etiquette, to monitor their body temperature t a day, to keep a diary and to inform the relevant health authority on a daily basis.
If this person previously register a a COVID -19 case, they can be consider a category 3 contact.
If the re be no symptoms, possible testing should be undertake 5-7 follo the first contact to the confirm case.
If the exact contact time be unkno test on day 1 and 7 -10 day follo the contact tracing be recommended.
This advice be also giv en for specific circumstances, such a for people in care and nursing homes.
Category 2 contact be people that have less than 15 minute face -to-face contact (.
people in the same room) and that have no direct contact to secretion or body fluids.
The health authority be not require to register the contact™s name, but may provide information on the disease and route of infection .
Category 2 contact should reduce contact to third party possible, they should maintain hand hygiene and adhere to c oughing etiquette, they should check for symptom once a day and maintain a diary.
If contact develop symptom they must self -isolate, contact the health authority and may be require medical consultation and adhere to advice from the health authority.
Cat egory 3 contact be medical /care , for example provide care or a part of a medical examination) adequate protective equipment throughout the entire contact time a as medical st aff contact (>2m) direct contact secretion, excretion or aerosol exposure.
26 Testing for this at-risk population should be do at a low threshold (more detail s in the guidance document) and the local health authority be to be inform r egarding suspected, confirm and decease case of COVID -19.
In collaboration the local health authority regu lar testing (.
t per ) could be implement to monitor the ongoing situation in the institution.
27 The RKI also announce that tea m be support outbreak containment measure in care and nursing home in several federal state .
Some difference bet federal state can be observe regard testing of resident and staff in resid ential care setting .
An overview of t he different approach can be find in the Anne x.
A medium report from 14 May 2020 suggest s that over 60 per cent of health authority unable to meet the requirement for contact tracing.
Follo a survey to 46 per cent of health authority responded, 67 per cent report that they do not have enough staff to ensure that all close contact of COVID -19 case could be traced.
Only 24 per cent able to adhere to the requirements.
28 This report do not focus on contact tracing in care setting .
It be therefore impossible to comment contract trace in care setting be be deliver follo the recommendations.
Germany and the COVID -19 long -term care situation 15 .
Protective equipment The Federal Mini stry of Health have become involve in the procurement of protective materials.
The Federal Ministry of Health distribute supply to the federal state and to the Association of Statutory Health Insurance Physicians (kassenärztliche Vereinigung) .
While the Association of Statutory Health Insurance Physicians distribute supply to physician provide ambulatory health care , the federal state supply all other area require protective equipment .
The different state have take different route to support care provider protective equipment .
Some state have provide information on their distribution system and give insight into the amount of equipment provide to health and social care providers.
An overview can be find in the Annex .
.4 Advanced directive and COVID -19 infection in care home So far be only a of guideline on the use of advanced directive from Baden -Württemberg .
They state that if a resident develop a severe form of COVID -19, the advance directive to exclude artificial respiration should be consider critically a an infection, such a COVID -19 and it related survival and recovery chances, may not have be consider by the person sign the document.
.5 Managing staff availability and The RKI have release recommendation s for leave procedure during a COVID -19 outbreak in care and nursing home both regular and reduced staff availability .
An initiative across federal state and organisation have develop the ‚care reserve™ (Pflegereserve) people care qualification can register 29 .
Similar initiative have also be undertake in Bavaria ., Bremen .and Rhineland -Palatinate .
In Berlin people care -rel ated profession qualify abroad be prioritise apply for permission to in Germany .
The Minister of Health in North -Rhine -Westphalia The health minister in North -Rhine Westphalia suggest an that people undertake a one -year apprenticeship to become a care assistant (Pflegeassistenz) should be require to receive a regulated training allo e. So far apprentice in hospital receive such allo , for apprentice in long -term care setting this remain unregulated.
This could support make the profession more attractive.
.6 Maintaining care during the COVID -19 pandemic The RKI guidance emphasize the importance of monitor the situation in institutional care settings.
It be recommend that a trained person should be responsible for clinical monitoring.
T his involves (at least) daily documentation of clinical symptom among resident and staff.
The minimum symptom to be monitor include fever (>29°C), coughing, shortness of breath, sore throat and sniffing.
Additional symptom to be monitor include muscular and joint pain, headaches, diarrhoea, loss of appetite, loss, conjunctivitis, skin rash, apathy and somnolence.
This information should be put together other relevant information of the individuals.
If there be 29 | Germany and the COVID -19 long -term care situation 16 specific member of staff responsible for specific resident this may mean that there be more sensitivity around change to residents™ health status .
Residents and staff should be encourage to self-report if they experience respiratory symptom or they feel fev erish 30 .
In the Federal State of Saarland all people live and care home be be test t for COVID -19 to get a comprehensive picture of the current situation.
The first round of test start on 21 April 2020 , the second round of test due to start on 12 May 2020.
Follo the first round of test (started on 21 April 2020) , all 130 care setting free of COVID -19.
31 In Lo -Saxony 14,500 nursing home have receive tablet to enable regular medical consultation s by video ca ll.
In addition, the tablet be anticipate to be use for social call the residents™ families.
32 .7 Opening -up strategy in residential care settings The Federal Ministry of Health provide information for care and nursing home visitor in May 2020 .
The document ask potential visitor to evaluate carefully their visit be really necessary.
If visitor decide that their visit be important they should: Regularly disinfect their hand , maintain sufficient distance to other people, include resid ents and staff in the care home, avoid physical contact (shaking hands, hugs) residents, cough or sneeze into their armpit or a single use tissue, should be dispose of after and keep their hand a from their face.
33 In addition , the Robert-Koch Institute have develop recommendation for visitor in residential care setting (20 May 2020) .
These include: Social contact should generally be maintain via telephone rather than through in person visits.
Visitors symptom of a cold as ll a people be contact person to a COVID -19 case should stay a from residential care settings.
In the case that visitor be allo : o Each visitor should be register (name, date, name of resident they visited) o Visits should be minimise an d limit in time o Visitors must be inform of required protective measures.
These include: Maintaining at least -2metres distance to the resident Wearing mouth -nose protection and a protective go Hand disinfection upon leave the resident™s room.
Germany and the COVID -19 long -term care situation 17 All 16 federal state have implement regulation that enable people live in residential care setting to have some visitors.
Across federal state care setting need to develop protection plan for each care set take their specific layout a nd environment into consideration.
Visitors have to make appointments, register for contact tracing, mouth -nose protection and adhere to distance and hygiene rules.
In some federal states™ visit s should take place outdoors, in others visit r ooms be preferred.
Others again enable visit in resident™s room .
There be also variation in frequency and length in resident have visitors.
In some federal state , resident can have visitor on a daily basis, in others this be only once a .
Details can be find in the Anne x.
Community -based care Updated guidance from 22 April further outline that c arers provide ambulatory care in people™s home (hav ing direct contact the at risk popul ation) should mouth -nose protection even they be not directly care for a patient .
The guidance further recommend that: If a person develop a respiratory illness or fever this should be follo up medical consultation If relevant, care staff should advise the care recipient or people in their personal environment that the care recipient should not be receive visitors, especially not if they have an acute respiratory illness or other infec tious disease When care for people fever and respiratory disease , protective equipment in line recommendation s should be .
The required protective equipment should be available to care staff The health status of long -term care staff should be monitor Staff respiratory disease s should stay at home If a person be be move from or to a different care environment, information regard respiratory illness or a suspected COVID -19 infection should be share ahead of time.
Federal state s have pick up on the guideline and also provide additional rule and recommendation .
An overview can be find in the Annex.
In addition, interventions, such a by the medical service of the health and long -term care insurances (medizischer Dienst der Krankenversicherung) in Berlin -Brandenburg provide an advisory telephone service for ambulatory and residential care providers.
This give care professional an oppor tunity to ask question around COVID -19 .
Measures to support people long -term care need living in the community during the COVID -19 pandemic On 14 May the federal government agree the second law for the protection of the population during an epidemic situation of national significance (z Gesetz zum Schutz der Bevölkerung bei einer epidemischen Lage von nationaler Trag ).
This law enable peopl e at care level 1 to use the 125 of financial support (Entlastungsbetrag) they be entitle to for purpose than be allo in normal circumstances.
For example, n ormally this funding have to be use for service to relieve unpaid carers and to enhance the independence of people care needs.
Now this financial support can also be use for other purposes, such a for help the household.
Germany and the COVID -19 long -term care situation 18 This remain in place until 30 September.
Information about the availability of financial support and reduced barrier to enter the scheme have also be provide by the state s of Saxony and North -Rhine Westphalia (see Table 8) .
People care need (all care levels) can use support service that have not be use (that have be save -up) until 30 September 2020.
35 People care ne ed can also claim up •60 (normally •40) per month for protective material and disinfectant.
The additional funding be available retrospectively until 1 April 2020 and for as long a the COVID -19 pandemic lasts.
This aim to reflect the increase in price for some products.
36 .2 Measures to prevent spread of COVID19 infection .
Day and night care Across Germany day and respite centre have close .
This be in line RKI recommend ation that non -residential care setting should not be look after people have test positive fo r COVID -19 .
Where possible , people™s care need have be address through unpaid and ambulatory care.
Ho , in case alternative arrangement be not feasible , day care centre in most state can provide emergency care.
Relevant reason for need ing of emergency care include the next of kin be a key .
An overview can be find in the Annex.
Impact on unpaid carers and measure to support them The Senate Administration for Health, Care and Equality Berlin (Senatsver für Gesundheit, Pf lege und Gleichstellung Œ Abteilung Pflege) have develop recommendation for peo ple care need and unpaid family carers in the context of the COVID -19 pandemic .
This update on 20 May 2020 37 They include information transmission, symptoms, therapy and diagnostic of COVID -19.
COVID -19 relate test only take place if there i s reason to suspect infection.
The recommendation also provide information about people at high risk a a protective measure ( adherence to hygiene rules, physical /social distancing, vaccination to avoid double infection for people in risk groups) .
There be also specific recommendation regard care: The document recommend that people at high risk should minimise the number of visito rs, mean that child age 16 year and young and people symptom of illness should not be visiting.
Care that do not require contact, such a conversation, preparation of medication or meals, cleaning or document care tasks, should be perform follo thorough
Germany and the COVID -19 long -term care situation 19 disinfection of the hand and 2 meter physical distance or behind closed door .
It be recommend that the person care need stay in a different room the carer perform these activities.
Personal care tasks, such a body hygiene, dress or dressing, should only be perform follo thorough disinfection of the han d , glove and possible h mouth -and -nose protection.
The carer should not speak to the care recipient perform these tasks.
Duration and extent of these task should depend on consideration about need and care user protec tion.
Social contacts, possible, should be maintain via regular telephone calls, online chat or videoconferencing.
Hand letter be also mention a a possibility to stay in touch.
It should be ensure that emergency call can be made.
Should ambulator y care provider not be ensure the care of the person care needs, it should be consider in the family or neighbourhood could take on these tasks.
The number of people provide support should be as small a possible.
The importance of any appo intments outside the o home should be consider carefully and it should be explore they could be replace through telephone or online activity.
If an appointment be necessary people should avoid the use of public transport and instead use taxi or private cars.
An out a maybe a suitable alternative provide the person be dress appropriately .
Updated advice on support from neighbours recognise the many initiative that aim to support at risk population shopping and runn ing of errands.
While people be encourage to contact these source of support, they be urge to focus on infection protection.
The Senate of Berlin also p rovides a list of source support and advice for family carers .
Similarly, the Bavarian Ministry for Health and Care refer unpaid carers to the 110 office for unpaid carers ich have be in place in Bavaria for 20 years.
Those office have be advise to provide advice via telephone and email .
The guidance from Berlin also refer to the late legal change to support unpaid c arers.
As part of the second law for the protection of the population during an epidemic situation of national significance (z Gesetz zum Schutz der Bevölkerung bei einer epidemischen Lage von nationaler Trag ) (14 May) additional provision for unpaid carers implement .
This include that until 30 September 2020 family carers can receive care support money (Pflegeunterst ützungsgeld) for up to 20 day in situation a gap in the community care their relative normally receive occurs.
Un der normal circumstances, this be the case for up to 10 day to compensate for a loss of income if a sudden care need emerge the family and the person need to organise care in the community.
The right to stay a from due to an acute care si tuation the o family also be extend from 10 to 20 day until 30 September 2020.
Additional measure to make the caregiver leave act (Pflegezeitgesetz ) the family care leave act (Familienpflegezeitgesetz) more flexible to respond to the pand emic be be undertaken.
38 An overview of response across the different federal state can be find in the Annex.
Germany and the COVID -19 long -term care situation 20 Organisations such a the Germany Alzheimer™s Society and other charitable organisation and interes t group call for recognition of family carers, financial support, protective equipment and prioritise testing .
Impact on people live dementia and measure to support them .1 The added complexity of care for people dementia in care home Many people dementia benefit from routine and may seek close contact others.
This make s adhere to hygiene protocol difficult.
Some people may find it difficult to understand they should stay in isolation and they may find it difficult to adjust to disruption in their daily routines.
Where care home predominantly look after people th dementia, such a in the situation in Wolfsburg describe above , the challenge of respond to an outbreak in the care home be even more complex.
In response to that situation, the resident test negative separate from those test posi tive .
In Wolfsburg, the care home initially consider evacuate those that not infected, but a this may have cause considerable disruption to resident ™ lives, it decide instead to move resident test negative to a separate floor, they continue to be test every three day to monitor the spread of the virus .
Alzheimer™ s Societies in Germany have develop material (documents, podcasts and videos) to support people dementia and their family carers during the pandemic .
Lessons learn so far Short -term call for action In response to the infection of care home residents, the professional association of carers in Lo Saxony (Pflegekammer Niedersachsen) have call for care staff to join doctor and e mergency service in communal crisis management groups.
The association have far be demand that care recipient should regularly be test for COVID -19.
The association argue that this be important because even though visitor have be bann ed from care homes, staff could still carry the virus unkno into a care home.
For this reason, the association also critical of the loosening of quarantine guidance for care staff by the RKI.
The length of isolation specify in this guidance for medical personnel have be reduce from 14 to 7 day if the person concern do not show any symptom although this be only in the case of staff shortage and in agreement the health authority .
39 .deutsche - eber -zur -corona -fragen -und-ant -zu-corona -und- 40 .alzheimer -/ 41 .alzheimer -gesellschaft - -und-corona/ | Germany and the COVID -19 long -term care situation 21 On 24 April the German So ciety for Gerontology and Geriatrics (Deutsche Gesellschaft für Gerontologie und Geriatrie) publish a statement paper on enable the participation and social involvement of old people despite the COVID -19 pandemic.
This statement have ten key demands: Chronologic age cannot not be an argument to social participation .
There be no scientific reason for e xcluding old people disproportionately and blanket measure be ageis t. It be a form of age discrimination.
Countering stigma through the m e sage that old people be an indispensable part of society.
Older people a grandparents, partners, , volunteers, friend and consumer be an important part of society.
Social participation in employment a nd volunteering Workers and volunteer sho uld not be exclude base on chronologic age.
It be important that base on a professional risk assessment hygiene measure be consequently implement in environments.
Flanked by alter the environment for health risk these meas ures protect all and prevent ageist culture.
Organisations and institution that volunteer should communicate the risk involve in volunteer and appropriate help find satisfy alternative for people to pursue volu nteering activities.
Social participation of old people during the COVID -19 pandemic through radio and television Currently medium report mostly about old people.
It be if old people be give a voice in the medium and if they to be address a active people, able to take decision and actions.
Maintaining support structure even under the protective measure of the COVID -19 pandemic Service provider and authority be request to build up and expand innovative access especi ally to delivery -structures.
This could include pharmacy, physiotherapy, ergotherapy, psychotherapy, delivery service or social services.
Technical possibility a a social innovation be to be take into consideration.
The development and a s raise around emergency number and emergency help to support old people in emergency situation should be part of the measure that should urgently be implement so that old people and professional support provider can ensure people™s participat ion and care.
Enabling opportunity for participation of people receive care in the community and their relative For the virus not t o have dramatic consequence it be crucial that protective equipment become available delay for people car e need a a for both unpaid carers and pay carers provide ambulatory care.
Enabling social participation of old people live alone Especially for this group it can be assume that lack social participation not just lead to loneliness a nd depressive symptom s but may also cause considerab le physical and cognitive damage through inactivity , malnutrition, lack of fluids, mismedication and medical under provision .
This be also a risk for people in residential care setting focus on autono my and optional | Germany and the COVID -19 long -term care situation 22 support structures.
Locally organised support programme in a ll area of support for old people need to be good coordinated.
In addition to ambulatory care and the expansion of care service point , the provision of neighbourhood suppor t and civic support play important role in respond to the many new and diverse challenge that have occur in the context of the COVID -19 pandemic.
Enabling social participation of old people in residential care settings The organisation demand to expand quickly the digitalisation of residential care setting and to also enable the use and usability of these resource through, for example, especially trained companion .
Social participation can also be enable if the occupancy rate g ets temporarily reduce to create condition in the recommended physical distancing can be maintained.
It should be check there be possibility for mobile resident to temporarily move into rehabilitation setting or empty hotels.
This enable recei ving visit from relative and close friends.
Protected area could be establish for these visit a they be kno from infection in hospitals.
Concepts to support people dementia and adequate form of communication for people dementia s hould be consider especially in the daily care routine during this crisis (.
through specific training of staff) Enabling social participation in hospital The concern around COVID -19 should not keep old patient from attend hospital if they a re in need of treatment, such a for cancer, severe heart disease or other illness that require hospital treatment.
Hospitals be encourage to make the development and implementation of intelligent and flexible concept a priority to reduce social isolati on to a minimum.
Avoiding paternalism and encourage self -determination Older pe ople need to b e support through balance (not anxiety inducing) information to make a differentiated assessment of their situation include their individual resource and r isk profile .
Self -determination base on -up their option should be support .
| Germany and the COVID -19 long -term care situation 23 6.
Measures adopt to prevent and manage COVID -19 infection in care home Measures to support care home in prepare and deal outbreaks National task force to coordinate COVID -19 response in care home Notification of suspected case to Public Health authority Medical doctors, care and manager of facility have to inform the local relevant health authority of a suspected, confirm and decease COVID -19 case.
42 Strike forces/ Rapid response team Bavaria Should there be a COVID -19 infection in an institution, the Infectiology Task Force be mobilised.
Lo -Saxony In Lo Saxony nursing home can request the support from mobile team of qualified hygienist to support an outbreak of COVID -19.
The team be facilitate through a cooperation bet the Ministry of Social Affairs, Health and Equality in Lo Saxony (Nieders ächisches Ministerium für Soziales, Gesundheit and Gleichstellung) ,the medical service of the health and long -term care insurances (medizischer Dienst der Kra nkenversicherung) in Lo Saxony and the state health office.
43 RKI RKI staff support infection containment in care and nursing home across Germany 44 Reducing care home occupancy to facilitate management of potential outbreak Care home not to take in new resident Short -term transfer of resident to alternative accommodation Loosening regulation and inspection On 27 March the German Ministry of Health (Bundesgesundheitsministerium) announce a funding and support package to help care institut ion during the COVID -19 pandemic.
The measure outline include 42 43 -teams -zur -unterstutzung -von -pflegeheimen -bei -covid -19-ausbruchen -eingerichtet -kooperation -mit -medizinischem -dienst -der -krankenversicherung - 44 -05-21-?__blob=publicationFile | Germany and the COVID -19 long -term care situation 24 that domiciliary and residential care be relieve by suspend quality assessment a a change to assessment and the of obligatory advisory visit to people care need s .
Funding to boost staff numbers: funding for additional supply funding and to supplement viability of care home On 27 March the German Ministry of Health (Bundesgesundheitsministerium) announce a funding and support package to help care institution during the COVID -19 pandemic.
The measure outline include that l ong -term ca re insurance reimburse institution provide care that incur additional cost or loss of revenue due to the COVID -19 outbreak .
On 3 March, the National Association of Statutory Health Insurance Funds (GKV Spitzenverband) issue a statement on the rescue package to support care provider during the pandemic .
Measures to prevent COVID -19 infection from enter a home Preparatory measure The RKI (as of 20 May 2020) recommend that the mana gement of residential institution together the relevant health authority should develop a COVID -19 plan.
This plan should follow the regulation issue by the relevant state government (Landesregierung) in each federal state.
Aspects that should be c onsidered in the development include: Putting together a team designate responsibility for specific area (.
hygiene, communication, acquisition of materials) Informing residents, their relative and staff of relevant protective measure Informi ng and training staff regard the use of protective measure and equipment Training of all staff, especially cleaners, in hygiene, physical distancing and other relevant procedure Organising measure to reduce the number of contact the institut ional setting Setting and implement rule for visitor and external provider (.
hair dressers, chiropodists, physiotherapists, people in pastoral capacity) Under specific circumstances, and in collaboration the relevant health authorities, care setting can impose a ban to take on new residents.
If possible, provide alternative for communication Implementing regulation around staff absence Small group of designated resident should be organise for activity that need to be do collec tively.
This reduce the number of contact in case of a COVID -19 infection.
Staff should , if possible, in designated, independent teams.
The updated document far provide detailed information on hygiene measure a a for infection control i n residential care settings.
Basic hygiene rules, include hand hygiene (hand before and after prepare meals, before eating, after use the toilet, after have be outside, after touch jointly use surface (.
door handles) should be st rictly adhere to.
This include adhere to cough and sneeze rules, people should avoid touch their face (especially mouth and nose), remain physical distancing ( -2m), reduce contact others (residents, visitors) All staff direct contact to particularly vulnerable people should be mouth -nose protection to protect patients, even they be not engage in direct care tasks.
In addition, caring for people at risk display respiratory symptoms, the person care for should also mouth nose protection, if tolerable.
| Germany and the COVID -19 long -term care situation 25 Furthermore, a number of recommendation have be make regard the provision of single use tissues, location of bins, type of disinfectant to be used, daily disinfection routine and medical equipm ent.
The RKI also provide recommendation around preventative measure for care : The health status of staff should be monitor daily.
Staff should monitor their o health and inform management if they experience relevant symptoms.
Leave of staff due to respiratory symptoms, a confirmed COVID -19 infection or due to follo contact an infected person should be recorded.
There should be a low threshold for test of care and nursing home staff and testing should be do delay.
If there be sufficient test capacity it could be consider in collaboration the local health authority to regularly test staff ( or more frequently) .
In high risk institution (very large care setting dense occupancy or in region high COVID -19 incidence) the possibility for regular ( or more frequently) testing before shift commences should be explore 45 Bavaria The guidance from the Bavarian Ministry for Health and Care (Bayerisches Staatsministerium für Gesundheit und Pflege) (as of 3 March 2020) includes: Every institutional care set should name a commissioner for the pandemic coordinate measure in the case of an outbreak and also act a a contact person for the authorities.
As soon a there be suspicion of an infection, appropriate prevention and protection mechanism need to be put in place.
Should there be a COVID -19 infect ion in an institution, the Infectiology Task Force be mobilise .
Saarland Authorities in Saarland have also develop a ﬁprotection planﬂ for residential care settings.
This document, a the document find in other federal states, be largely in line RKI recommendation .
Isolation facility for all resident Hamburg Guidance from Hamburg add that contact bet staff and resident should be reduce as much a possible and the number of people one carer support should also be lo .
Measures to restrict visitor to care home Baden -Württemberg Ban of visitor maintai ned; visitor can be allo if appropriate protective measure against infection have be put in place, and can be use for example for relative of a person at the end of their life; Group activity have be stop (.2020 Œ .2020) Residents can only leave their residential care set to take up medical services, to go shopping for item of daily need if these need be not meet by the institution, for a (alone or one other person), ho , only if there be not enough space for 45 _blob=publicationFile | Germany and the COVID -19 long -term care situation 26 outdoor physical activity on the premise of the care set (.2020 -.2020) .
Visitors should mouth -nose protection, glove and an overcoat and a 2meter physical distance must be adhere to.
If physical aid be require for the resident, staff should be seek out for help .
People at the end of their life ca n be visit by their close relative .
Residents can have one visit per day for one hour.
Visitors must be 16 year or old and not have respiratory illness.
There should be visit time so that visitor can be list and introduce to hygienic measure .
Residents can enter and leave the house a they please but should be advise not to attend event or gathering of people; go for a outdoors do not cause concerns.
Residents that have return from a risk area should stay 14 day in isolation (no symptoms) .
Brandenburg No visitors, unless they attend to someone at the end of their life (.2020) .
Bremen Visitors be not allo unless they attend to someone at the end of their life .
Hamburg Visitors cannot be accept unless they come to visit a person near the end of their life .
Hessen Visitors be not allo in care and nursing home.
This be expect to last until 3 May 2020.
Visitors may be permit to be a resident at their end of life.
Visitors must adhere to hygiene rule and the length of the visit may be limited.
A person that have enter Germany in the last 14 day be not allo to be a visitor .
Mecklenburg -Western Pomerania Ban of visitor maintain (.20 20) .
Lo Saxony The Ministry for Social Affairs and Health of Lo Saxony (Niedersächsisches Ministerium für Soziales, Gesundheit und Gleichstellung ) have already (effective 16 March) declare a ban on visitor in care and nursing homes, unless they be the loved one of a person receive palliative care.
This document remain in force until 18 April.
On 17 March, the health authority in Lo Saxony ( Landesgesundh eitsamt Niedersachsen ) recommend care and nursing home to pause community activity and for staff to avoid close contact each other.
Recommendations from the health authority suggest that resident live in institutional care setting should not leave the premises, such a to visit their relative or to go shopping.
It far recommend that care home should postpone take in new resident (non -urgent cases) to free up space for patient release from hospital (see recommendation 20 Mar ch 2020) .
North -Rhine Westphalia Visitors be not allo to enter care or nursing homes.
Exceptions can be make if there medical or socio -ethical reasons, such a a re sident be receive palliative care .
Residents be allo to leave the premise of the care setting, ho , should only have contact other people live or in the care setting.
If this cannot be ensured, the resident be require to spend 14 day direct contact other resident of the care setting .
Rhineland -Palatinate The visiting of resident in care and nursing home be not permitted.
Spouses, Fiancées or Life partner be permit to visit.
Exceptions can be make for peopl e be gravely ill or near the end of their life.
The care setting have to ensure that hygienic standard be be maintain throughout the visits.
Children under 16 be not | Germany and the COVID -19 long -term care situation 27 allo .
These people need to be healthy and not have be in contact h a COVID -19 infect person .
Residents can leave the care set if they be hea lthy and there be not sufficient outdoor space a part of the home.
Residents be only allo to go outside one other person or member of staff to be on the premise or it near surrounding.
Residents and staff should be mouth -nose protection and gloves.
Residents be not allo to have contact people outside the care setting.
If this cannot be ensured, the resident concern be require to be quarantine for 14 day .
Saarland Visits in residential care setting be not allo .
A maximum of one person (registered) per visitor per day for a maximum of one hour can be made.
Exceptions can be make for resident near the end of their life or for other medical or ethnic -social reason .
Saxony Ban of visitor maintain (17 April 2020); exception can be ma de follo agreement management of the institution and adhere to relevant terms; Residents can have contact close relative outside adhere to physical distancing & hygiene rules, up to 5 visitor be allo to be a resident at the end of life .
Saxony -Anhalt Visitors in care and nursing home be not allo .
There can be exception for patient receive palliative care, ho , visitor cannot enter if they be infect COVID -19, have be a contact person (I and II accord to RKI criteria) or have be abroad .
Schles -Holstein Visitors be not allo in care and nursing homes.
Exceptions may be give on a case by case basis.
If visitor enter, they need to be reg istered and can stay for up to one hour, adhere to hygiene and personal protection rules.
The time limit do not apply to visitor of people receive palliative care.
Visitors respiratory illness be not allo to enter the care settings (.202 0) .
Thuringia Visitors be not allo to enter care or nursing homes.
Management of care and nursing home can allow visitor under special circumstances.
In these cases, they be require to ensure protective and hygienic measures.
Visitors be not allo to enter if they have contact a COVID -19 case .
Measures to reduce risk of staff pass on infection to resident Travel re trictions for care staff Restrictions on staff entry into care home Ensuring care staff only in one care home Staff remain in care homes, usually for at least 2 Use of Personal Protection Equipment (PPE) RKI recommendation ( 20 May 2020): | Germany and the COVID -19 long -term care situation 28 Staff support resident suspect and confirm case should be train and not be ask to care for others.
Staff care for resident suspect and confirm case should personal protective equipment include mouth -nose protec tion or preferably FFP2 masks, protective go , safety goggles and single use gloves.
For all activity that involve aerosol production breathe mask (FFP2 or higher) should be .
Personal protective equipment should be put on before enter the roo m of the resident and take off before leave the designate decontamination area or the resident™s room.
Protective equipment and information for it use should be place immediately at the entrance to live quarters.
Due to the experience of asymptomat ic case it should be consider for staff on an affect by a COVID -19 outbreak to personal protective equipment.
It be recommend to expand hygienic measure early across the .
Bins for the disposal of single -use equipment should b e place on the inside by the door.
Single use glove should be dispose of before leave the room into a closed container.
46 Provision of Personal Protection Equipment (PPE) Baden -Württemberg The provision of protective equipment be usually organise by the provider or institutional management.
Due to shortages, the federal government and the state be support the provision.
Care provider that be run low on protective equipment can communicate their need for support through dedicate regional e -mail contact .
Since 26 March, 300,000 protective glove and more than 300,000 protective mask of different category provider.
Daimler provide 110,000 FFP2 mask that in part have already be distribute to local authority .
Bavaria Residential care home be supply mouth -nose protective equipment a hospital and doctor surgery .
The health authority put in place a task force to support authority and care and nursing home in combat COVID -19.
As far a available, all people in residential care setting should be mouth -nose protection .
Follo RKI guidance, mouth -nose protective equipment can be reuse if r esources be scarce .
If no single use disposable sm ock available, reusable smock can be used.
They need to be in a disinfection laundry process .
Brandenburg Brandenburg have receive 2 million mouth -nose protective equipment and 80,000 litre of disinfection liquid.
The provision of material organise d through the ﬁtask force supplyﬂ of ministry coordination group ﬁCoronaﬂ of the government of Brandenburg .
Suppliers of protective equipment can register their offer the po louse on a dedicate , so that they can be purchase and organise centrally .
Mecklenburg -Western Pomerania Weekly improvement of equipment available; production of equipme nt in Mecklenburg Vorpommern start .
North -Rhine Westphalia The company Dr Feist Automotive Bielefeld GmbH (DFA Bielefeld) have be commission by the state gover nment of North -Rhine Westphalia to produce 29 Million mouth -nose protective masks.
From 8 April until 29 July the company deliver 46 _blob=publicationFile | Germany and the COVID -19 long -term care situation 29 320,000 mask to the state government on a daily basis for a cost of around •17 Million .
The protective mask be be distribute to care setting via local authority and communal crisis team .
So far (8 April) the Health Ministry of North -Rhine Westfalia have distribute million prote ctive masks, million gloves, 78,000 protective go , 3,000 safety goggles, 250,000 test tube and 22,000 litre of disinfectant .
Rhineland -Palatinate Protective equipment so far have be distribute through the Authority for Social Aspects, Youth and Care (Landesamt für Soziales, Jugend und Versorgung) to health and care setting that experience shortages.
Prior to the delivery each institution present an overview of material allocate and have the opportunity to alter the figure accord to need.
Many institution have lo the n umber of equipment need .
Saarland The Ministry of Health a provide 11,200 FFP2 mask (30 March) and 30,00 simple surgery mask (3 April) to the S aarland Society of Care .
Special control by the Saarland authority for re sidential care ( saarländische Heimaufsicht) be planned.
This be suppose to check the occupancy of the institution and staffing.
If relevant, this may have to be control in the premises.
Saxony The Red Cross have distribute 182,000 mouth -nose protective mask provide by the federal government in equal share to the different district from they can be far distribute (1 April) .
Thuringia Protective equipment in Thuringia be order centrally to the office for consumer protection (Landesamt für Vebraucherschutz).
Information on the supply need be regularly obtained.
In the care sector, supply be distribute through organisation such a the Red Cross .
Measures to ensu re that new or return resident do not bring in the infection Quarantine for people discharge from hospital Baden -Württemberg New resident and resident return from hospital should be treat a person suspect of COVID -19 .
The 14 day ﬁquarantine careﬂ can also take place in other care setting should the care or nursing home be unable to meet the quarantine requirement .
Bavaria Since 4 April 2020 care and nursing home in Bavaria do not take on any new r esidents.
Exceptions can only be make if the institution can ensure that the new resident can be quarantine for 14 day and if the relevant health authority agree to the arrangement .
Return from resident follo hospitalisation be also only allo if the person can be isolate for 14 day and if there be sufficient protective equipment available.
Other the person have to go into short -term care settings, such a in rehabilitation hospital this care can be provide in the form of short -term care .
Berlin The Senate Administration for Health, Care and Equality Berlin point out that people discharg ed from hospital into institutional care setting cannot be routinely test due to limited capacity.
It be far note that a negative test result at the point of discharge do not mean that a person not sho symptom ( respiratory infection ) not develop symptom later on.
For this reason, it be not suggest that nurse home | Germany and the COVID -19 long -term care situation 30 should stop receive people discharge from hospital that have not be test (6 April 2020) .
The response from other federal state can be find in Table 1.
Hamburg Unless care home have receive order to stop take on new resident or they have no capacity they be expect to take in new resident .
Before receive a new resident, the relevant doctor have to confirm that a negative COVID -19 test have be obtain relevant to the timing of en tering the care setting.
Lo Saxony Care and nursing home be not allo to accept new resident .
Exceptions can be make if care home can ensure that the new resident be accommodate separately from other resident and keep in quarantine .
People discharge from hospital can be discharge into care setting or rehabilitation clinic that have be prepare for this type of care and have be approve for the provision of short -term care.
Other exception be possible follo communicati on the health authority .
This new rule issue follo the COVID -19 outbreak in a care and nursing home in Wolfsburg .
There be around 80 rehabil itation hospital that can support the care of people care need .
Care and nursing home can accept new resident as long a the care set can ensure that the new resident be place under quarantine for 14 days.
47 North -Rhine Westphalia The hospital be responsible to test the per son discharge to residential care set for COVID -19.
Hospitals also have inform receiving care or nursing about possible COVID -19 symptom in .
New resident have to be test for COVID -19.
Tests sho uld be mark for priority testing.
In general people have ne enter or return to a residential care set should be place in quarantine or isolation from other resident for 14 day in area appropriate in size to the number of resident .
It be plan that those infected and people symptoms, but a negative test result, be house separately.
Care staff be only look after people in the isolated or quarantined area be test by the company doctor depend on risk .
As above, these test should receive priority Rhineland -Palatinate People discharge from hospital can return to their care or nursing home unless there be an explicit stop or if there be no capacity in the receiving care setting.
Isolation and quarantine area need to be prepare for new resident and those return fo llo hospitalisation .
Saarland The plannable admission of new resident should be reduce or pause to enable capacity for COVID -19 patient .
All new admission to care and nurse home immediately require test for COVID19.
Saxony When resi dent do not have a COVID -19 infection a statement respond to three question be require by the Q1: Has the person be in an at -risk area the last 14 days?
47 -der -landesregierung - | Germany and the COVID -19 long -term care situation 31 Q2: Has the person have contact to a pers on suspect of or a confirm COVID -19 infection in the last 14 days?
Q3: Has the person have symptom during the last 48 hour that could indicate a COVDI -19 infection?
It be recommend that resident should stay in a single room for ideally 14 day , but at least for 7 day .
Measures to monitor potential infection Systematic symptom monitor The health status of the staff should be monitored.
(RKI recommendations, 20 May 2020 ) Medical staff confirm COVID -19 case be encourage to maintain a diary in they record self -checking of symptom (examples of diary be available on the RKI ).
(RKI recommendations, 20 May 2020 ) The RKI recommend (at least) daily documentation of c linical symptom among resident and staff.
The minimum symptom to be monitor include fever (>°C), coughing, shortness of breath, sore throat and sniffing.
Additional symptom to be monitor include muscular and joint pain, headaches, ing, diarrhoea, loss of appetite, loss, conjunctivitis, skin rash, apathy and somnolence.
This information should be put together other relevant information of the individuals.
Residents and s taff should be encourage to self -report if they experience respiratory symptom or they feel feverish.
48 Hamburg People care need in in residential care setting and those live at home in receipt of domiciliary care should have a daily temperature check (for those receive multiple domiciliary care visit at each visit).
Novel coughs, change in breathe frequency and hoarseness be to be document.
If pathological change be be observe the relevant GP should be contacted.
If symptom occur th e person care need should be isolate as far a possible.
49 Testing care home resident and staff Baden -Württemberg One medical doctor in charge of test for a institution that can respond quickly if necessary .
Tests can only be conduct if there be a reasonable suspicion of an infection (follo RKI recommendations).
All resident and staff that develop symptom should be test as soon a possible.
Residents should also be test if they develop unspecific symptom or if their general state be deteriorating.
As soon a there be a of an infection, contact person (category 1) be tested.
If there be several cases, other asymptomatic resident and staff can be test .
Bavaria If there a s uspicion that there may be several person infect one care or nursing home, testing among resident and staff should happen immediately .
Bavaria pursue the strategy to test person there be a reasonable suspicion that they may have a COVID -19 infection and their contact persons.
Staff in health and long -term care should be prioritise .
Berlin If there be a suspected COVID -19 case, resident to be isolate in their room in the care set until test result available (currently it take 1 day) .
If close contact be 48 __blob=publicationFile 49 | Germany and the COVID -19 long -term care situation 32 be test depends on the situation and be decide on a case by case basis.
Staff have be class a close contact and be need in care w ill be test .
Hamburg If a COVID -19 infection have be confirm in a resident or member of staff, the care provider be require to test all care recipient and all staff immediately for COVID019 and to repeat this at a useful time interval .
If staff short age, quick testing of staff if there have be cases; staff from other institution (.
closed day care centres) can be use .
Mecklenburg -Western Pomerania Preventing testing of care -home staff to be increase (.2010).
Priority testing of symptomatic patient & test of care - and nursing home and ambulatory carers if they be possible contact of a COVID -19 case .
North -Rhine Westphalia Staff that be only in quarantine or isolation area, depend on risk be test by the company doctor.
Rhineland -Palatinate The company doctor (or other relevant doctors) need to ensure that staff in the isolation and quarantine area depend on risk be be test for COVID -19 .
If a resident be diagnose COVID -19, all other resident that have contact that person 48 prior to the development of initial symptom need also be communicate to the local health authority.
The local health authority be in charge of allocate the risk categorisation for each contact.
If there be more than t case in one care home all resident should ideally be accommodate in single rooms, particularly if they be in the high risk group .
All organisational measure need to be coordinate the local health authority .
If a member of staff be urgently need but have have contact a COVID -19 case or experience symptoms, they need to have s take on day 3,5 and 7 a as day 14.
In addition, they need to mouth -nose protection, have to be change at least every 2 hour or as soon a it become moist .
Saarland According to a ne report the health ministry Saarland and the University hospita l Homburg have develop a concept to test all resident and staff in care and nursing homes.
They be start 116 out of 157 care and nursing homes.
The resident be check t (one - time difference bet tests) and staff continuously t per .
The initiative start care setting that so far have not experience COVID -19 cases.
The testing of resident be conduct by staff in the care and nursing home.
The s be suppo sed to be do use a procedure develop by institute that reduce the amount of material required.
As soon a an anti -body test become available, carers and resident shall test a a second step .
Saxony If there be a COVID -19 infection among staff or resident in a residential care setting, all staff possible and all resident be tested.
If there be spatial separation bet groups, only those in the affected group be tested, other the institution require testing.
Testing be coordinate through the relevant health authority.
If a carer experie nces symptoms, they have to be test before start their shift.
Until result have arrive the person be only allo to protective equipment.
If resident show symptom they need to be test immediately.
The federal stat e of Saxony carry the cost for testing.
Costs of test for resident and care staff symptom be cover by the GKV.
If test be request there have be a positive case, the institution carry the cost.
Comprehensive testing of all p eople living and in residential care setting | Germany and the COVID -19 long -term care situation 33 Saarland The Federal State of Saarland together the University Homburg have initiate comprehensive testing of all people live and in residential care settings.
Since 21 April over 20,00 0 people have be tested.
All 130 care setting that have be test free of COVID -19.
A second round start in the of 12 May.
50 Training of care staff in recognize atypical symptom Measures to control the infection once it have ent ered the facility Contact tracing and isolation base on contact The RKI guideline also recommend contact tracing of contact person in cooperation the local health authority.
The local health authority have to be inform about each suspected and c onfirmed case of COVID -19 has.
The RKI recommend that all contact a COVID -19 case have have until up to t day before symptom begin should be listed.
Category 1 contact be people that have cumulatively be exp osed to at least 15 minute face -to-face contact or there have be direct contact of secretion or body fluid of the infected person (for medical and care personnel exposure protective equipment).
These contact be deem a at high risk of have be infected.
Their detail be register the health authority and there be a follow -up investigation.
Category 1 contact be ask to isolate at home a from other household members, to maintain frequent hand and cough ing etiquette, to monitor their body temperature t a day, to keep a diary and to inform the relevant health authority on a daily basis.
If this person previously register a a COVID -19 case, they can be consider a category contact.
If there a re no symptoms, possible testing should be undertaken 5 -7 follo the first contact to the confirm case.
If the exact contact time be unkno test on day 1 and 7 -10 day follo the contact tracing be recommended.
This advice be also give f or specific circumstances, such a for people in care and nursing homes.
Category 2 contact be people that have less than 15 minute face -to-face contact (.
people in the same room) and that have no direct contact to secretion or body fluids.
The health authority be not require to register the contact™s name, but may provide information on the disease and route of infection.
Category 2 contact should reduce contact to third party possible, they should maintain hand hygiene and adhere to cough ing etiquette, they should check for symptom once a day and maintain a diary.
If contact develop symptom they must self -isolate, contact the health authority and may be require medical consultation and adhere to advice from the health authority.
Categor y 3 contact be staff that have contact a conf example provide care or a part of a medical examination) adequate protective equipment throughout the entire contact time a as medical staff contact (>2m) direct contact secretion, excret ion or aerosol exposure.
51 Testing for this at -risk population should be do at a low threshold (more detail in the guidance document) and the local health authority be to be inform regard suspected, confirm and 50 -05-12-stand -corona -massnahmen.
html 51 | Germany and the COVID -19 long -term care situation 34 deceased case of COVID -19.
In col laboration the local health authority regular testing (.
t per ) could be implement to monitor the ongoing situation in the institution.
52 RKI recommendation for care Under regular staff levels, staff identify a contact per son category 1 (higher risk of infection = at least 15 minute face -to-face contact a COVID -19 case direct contact to body fluid or secret ion ) have to isolate at home for 14 days.
This include s physical distancing from other household members, regular hand and adhering to coughing and sneeze hygiene rules.
Until the 14 th day of isolation, contact person in category 1 must monitor their temperature t a day, maintain a diary and inform the local health authority on a daily basis.
A person identify a risk category 2 (low risk = less than 15 minute face -to-face contact a COVID -19 case and no direct contact to body fluid or secret ion ) can continue to mouth and nose protection as long a they don™t develop any symptom s. Staff in risk category 2 be ask to monitor and document their health for up to 14 day after exposure .
They should strictly adhere to all hygiene recommendation and possible maintain a distance of at least m etres from others, include during breaks.
If they develop symptoms, there should be an immediate test.
Staff contact an infected person, but exhibit symptom of a cold , should stay at home and can only start if they have be symptom -free for at least 48 ho urs.
If possible, they should be test for COVID -19.
In the case of any of the staff test positive for COVID -19 they should stay at home in quarantine for at least the time they experience symptom or for 14 days.
They can start again once they have be symptom -free for 48 hour and have t negative test 24 hour apart.
In case of staff shortage, the recommendation only change for staff identify a risk category 1.
The se staff should then stay at home and quarantine for at least seven day but can return to after if they remain symptom free and mouth -nose -protection during the entire time they spend at .
Other the routine continue a for staff identify a risk category 2 .
Schles -Holstein Schles -Holstein support the ir health authority •5million over the next 12 months.
This should enable the recruitment of 100 new member of staff.
The additional staff member could support contact trace activities.
53 Isolation measure Isolation of resident possibl e, probable and confirm COVID19 (risk zones) If there be evidence of COVID -19 in an institution, the institution (space and staff) should be separate into three areas: one area for those symptom and contact affect people; one a rea for those suspected case (residents sho symptom or have be in close contact infect residents) have not yet have test results; and one area for people have test positive for COVID -19.
The guidance state that should addi tional infectious disease be prevalent (.
Staff should only be in one of the designate areas.
(RKI 20 May 2020).54 Isolation of resident symptom in single part of the fa cility 52 __blob=publicationFile 53 - 54 __blob=publicationFile | Germany and the COVID -19 long -term care situation 35 Residents that have test positive or be suspect of have COVID -19, resident symptom and their contact should be move into single rooms, ideally their o room.
These resident must not participate in activity resident s that have test negative.
(RKI 20 May 2020) 55 Staff support resident suspect and confirm case should be train and not be ask to care for others (RKI 20 May 2020) .
56 Bavaria To stop chain of infections, affect resident should immed iately be isolate those have become ill should be move into hospital or other institution .
Lo Saxony The health authority in Lo Saxony ( Landesgesundheitsamt Niedersachsen ) on 17 March recommend that care and nursing home strictly separate those suspe cted of COVID -19 and non -infected resident .
Removing resident test positive to quarantine centre Removing resident symptom of COVID19 to other accommodation Saxony In Saxony 53 institution have be prepare to provide short -term care in case care or nursing home be be place under quarantine (3 April 2020) Ensuring access to health care for resident have COVID -19 Telehealth visit from healthcare provider Lo -Saxony 1,400 nursing home in Lo -Saxony have receive tablet to enable regular medical consultation by video call.
This reduce the risk of infection and support maintain residents™ health.
In add ition, the tablet be anticipate to be use for social call the residents™ families.
Lo -Saxony pay around •200,000 to supply the table and the platform use for the medical consultations.
General Practitioners involve receive the necessary soft free of charge.
Nursing home interested in this initiative can apply until 30 June 2020.
57 Access to palliati ve care Advanced directives Only guideline from Baden -Württemberg have be find to specifically reflect on the issue of the use of advanced directives.
They state that if a resident develop a severe form of COVID -19, the advance directive to exclu de artificial respiration should be consider critically a an 55 __blob=publicationFile 56 __blob=publicationFile 57 -fur -niedersachsens -pflegeheime -projekt -videosprechstunde -startet - | Germany and the COVID -19 long -term care situation 36 infection, such a COVID -19 and it related survival and recovery chances, may not have be consider by the person sign the document.
Deploying additional healt hcare staff to care home Ensuring care home have adequate supply of medicine & equipment Managing staff availability and Government (local, national or regional) take over of care home Funding to boost staff numb ers: retention bonus pay to staff Federal Government The second law for the protection of the population during an epidemic situation of national significance (z Gesetz zum Schutz der Bevölkerung bei einer epidemischen Lage von nationaler Trag ) outline that all people employ in old age care be able to make a staggered claim on a one -off bonus payment (Corona -Prämie) of up to •1,000.
The high bonus payment be make to full -time staff provide direct care and support.
The social c be insurance reimburse employer for the bonus initially.
During the second half 2020 the Federal Ministry of Health (Bundesministerium für Gesundheit) and the Federal Ministry of Finance (Bundesministerium für Finanzen) decide over the extent o f a government grant for health and care insurance to enable the stabilisation of the contribution rate.
The federal state and employer in care can increase the one -off bonus up to the tax and social security tax free amount of •1,500.
58 Bavaria On 7 April 2020, it report that the Bavarian cabinet have decide that around 250,000 pay carers in care and nursing home a a in care setting fo r people special need receive a single payment of •500 (tax -free) in recognition of the they have be provide during the pandemic.
This cost the federal state of Bavaria •126 million .
As part of the updated measures, the Bavarian Ministry for Health and Care announce that care in care and nursing homes, hospitals, rehabilitation hospitals, care setting for people special needs, ambulatory care service and ambulance staff r egularly more than 25 hour per can apply to receive •500.
Those regularly 25 hour or fe per can apply to receive •300.
This money come out of a special fond put together to respond to COVID -19 .
Hamburg On 14 May, Hambur g announce that long -term care receive a one -off care bonus of up to •1,500.
In Hamburg around 25,400 employee receive the bonu s. Hamburg contribute about •.
59 58 -19-bevoelkerungsschutz - 59 -05-14-bgv -coronavirus -pflegebonus/ | Germany and the COVID -19 long -term care situation 37 Rhineland -Palatinate On 19 May the federal state of Rhineland -Palatinate announce that they top up the bonus payment for care up t o •1,500.
There be around 55,000 care employ in long -term care setting for old people in Rhineland -Pfalz.
The cost of the carer bonus payment for the federal state be estimate to amount to bet 18 and 22 Million Euro.
60 Saarland On 13 M ay, the federal government of Saarland have announce to increase the one -off care bonus by •500 so that care in long -term care for old people can receive up to •1,500.
61 Schles -Holstein It have be report that In Schles -Holstein all 20,00 0 care receive a COVID -19 care bonus of •1,500.
The government pay this out of it o household if no nation agreement can be arrange .
Financial protection of frontline care On 23 April the German government announce minimum for nursing assistant be increase from 1 May 2020 to 1 April 2022 in four step until they reach •12 ,55 across Germany.
Qualified assistant that have undergo a one -year apprenticeship receive a minimum of •12,50 (West) or •12,20 (East) a of 1 April 2021.
From 1 April 2022 minimum across Germany for this group be •13,20.
For care w orkers three -year apprenticeship minimum be •15 a of 1 April 2021.
This increase to •15,40 by 1 April 2022.
In addition to the vacation day be legally entitle to, all care receive additional pay day off .
Recruitment of additional staff Recruitment of qualify An initiative across federal state have create the ‚Pflegeres erve™ people a care -related qualification but not currently in this area can register.
The y can be connect to health and long -term care setting in their area that experience staff shortages.
62 Bavaria ‚Carepool™ (Pflegepool): Since 23 March Bavaria have a people have a qualification or experience in health and social care, t hat do not fall into an increase risk group and be not currently actively employ in care relate job can register.
The volunteer be be allocate centrally accord to need.
Volunteers employ in other job be free from their duty and cont inue to receive their income; the self -employed receive compensation for their loss of business .
Berlin People a qualification in a care -related profession from abroad be receive priority over other health relate qualification apply for permission to in Germany .
Over 400 ne qualify care professional could be employ in Berlin a examination could be complete follo RKI recommendation .
Bremen In Bremen people health and care qualification be enc ouraged to register the city government.
This doesn™t mean that they have to in care relate jobs.
It offer the opportunity to contact potential additional support in case of staff shortage .
People a re also encourage to register volunteer portal .
60 -pfalz -beschliesst -aufstockung -des -pflegebonus -auf -bis -zu-1500 -euro -1/ 61 -05-13-sonderpr%C3% 62 | Germany and the COVID -19 long -term care situation 38 Rhineland -Palatinate The nursing council Rhineland -Palatinate encourage care professional (people relevant qualifications) to register the c be pool in Rhineland -Palatinate.
Service provider urgently require staff can contact the care insurances.
They, together the advice and audit authority ass the situation.
Follo this people register from the ‚volunteer pool™ can be allo cated.
Currently there be 344 person register in the pool .
Recruitment of staff that be new to the sector North -Rhine -Westphalia The health minister in North -Rhine Westphalia suggest on 19 May that people undertake a one -year apprenticeship to become a care assistant (Pflegeassistenz) should be require to receive a regulated training allo .
So far apprentice in hospital rceive such allo , for apprentice in long -term care setting this rema ins unregulated.
The minister emphasise the important of ensure qualify care to ensure the provision of quality long -term care in future.
In addition, the government of North -Rhine Westphalia be plan on streamline the qualification so th at those like to obtain further qualification can use the one -year apprenticeship a a recognised building block.
63 Rapid response team Loosening staff regulation On 27 March the German Ministry of Health (Bundesgesundheitsministerium) announce a funding and support package to help care institution during the COVID -19 pandemic.
The measure outline include that in order to maintain the provision of care, institutional care setting be allo to deviate from certain rule and oper ational frame around staff level .
Allo staff restrict visa to more hour Recruiting volunteer Supporting care home staff accommodation and practical measure Bavaria The Bavarian Minister for Health and Care and the Bavarian Minister of Finance announce that the catering for all staff in health a nd care set (hospital, care or nursing homes) be financially support (• per member of staff per day) a a sign of appreciation of their role in respond to the pandemic (as of 1 April 2020) .
63 -laumann -die -ungleichbeha ndlung -bei -der -verguetung -der -pflegeassistenz | Germany and the COVID -19 long -term care situation 39 Psychological support to care home staff may have experience traumatic situation Measures to compensate for impact of physical distancing in care home Methods to combat loneliness in resident Methods to e nabl e visitor in residential care setting Baden -Württemberg Baden -Württemberg be relax the ban of visitor in care an d nursing homes.
So far close relative allo to visit their relative in residential care setting under appropriate measure to prevent infection (.
of protective equipment) if the resident other have suffer physical or ment al damage through social isolation.
From 18 May on each resident can have one visit of a maximum of t person (There can be exception for people at the end -of-life) and the care set can put a time limit to the length of a visit.
If a to vi sit cannot be accommodated, the institution have to offer an alternative reasonable time.
Visits can only take place in a resident™s room, a visitor room or other suitable area for visitors.
Care setting can ban visit in a resident™s room if other suitable visitor area be available.
Care setting should enable visit in the resident™s room for a bedridden person, a person special need or visitor of a person near the end -of-life.
People to visit a person living in a care set should notify the care set to enable visitor management.
It be not possible to visit a person in a care set the approval of the institution.
Visitors need to be register by the care set in case contact trace becomes necessary.
Visitors can only enter care setting follo disinfection of their hands.
Visitors also need to a mouth -nose protect during their entire visit in the care set unless there be health reason or other important reason they cannot do this .
Visitor need to keep at least metre distance to persons the care setting, unless they visit a person near the end -of-life.
Care set have to produce a, institution specific concept for visitor that outline how visit can take pl ace take local condition into consideration.
From 18 May professional visit to care setting through hairdressers, physiotherapist or speech therapist or for pastoral visit can take place provide appropriate protective measure be in place and the care settings agree to these visits.
64 Bavaria In Bavaria the ban of visit in residential care setting lift on 9 May.
Residents be allo to have one visit per day from a close family member or a far designate person at a fixed time.
Visit or need to a mask and have to, 64 .baden - -in -krankenhaeusern -und-pflegeheimen - -schritt -gelockert/ (Accessed 19 May 2020) | Germany and the COVID -19 long -term care situation 40 possible, maintain at least metre distance.
In addition, care setting need to develop a protection and hygiene concept.
65 Berlin People living in residential care setting in Berlin can have one visitor per day.
Visitors respiratory illness be not allo to visit.
Providers of residential care setting can limit visit rule of ban visit should a COVID -19 case be confirm the care setting.
Limitations on visiting rule need to be make in acc ordance the relevant health authority and need to be limit in time.
Severely ill and die people can have visitor restrictions.
Similarly, visitor be not limit for people in hospices.
66 Brandenburg People living in residential care set ting in Brandenburg can have one visitor if it can be ensure that entrance to care setting be manage and unnecessary physical contact bet visitors, resident and staff can be avoid and as far a possible effective protection of resident from in fection can be ensure (since 9 May).
These limitation do not apply to seriously ill people and those near the end -of-life and for visit for therapeutic or pastoral reasons.
People respiratory illness cannot visit a residential care set and v isits can be ban if a COVID -19 case if confirm the care setting.
All people must adhere to instruction by the care set and exist hygiene plans.
67 Bremen People live in residential care setting in Bremen can have one visitor per for a maximum of 45 minute (the visitor cannot change).
There have to be an agreed appointment for a visit.
Both visitor and resident must not display COVID -19 relate symptoms, visitor must be at least 16 year old, have register enter the care setting, have receive information on hygiene practice and this have be document and staff must be present resident and visitor meet.
Visitors have to disinfect their hand enter an leave the care setting.
Visitors be not allo to br ing food and food and drink cannot be consume during the visit.
Visits should ideally not take place in the resident™s room; sufficiently large room should be make available.
This do not apply if resident be bedbound or have specific special needs.
Residents can have contact one visitor in the outdoor area of the care facility if hygiene and distance rule a a regulation of the care set be maintained.
68 65 ahmen/ 66 -und-pflege/ 67 .brandenbu 68 | Germany and the COVID -19 long -term care situation 41 Hamburg From 19 May every person live in residential care setting be allo to have one choose person visit them once a for at least one hour.
Further visit by this person up to a maximum of t hour per can be permit by the care provider.
Visits of people at the -end -of-life should be allo .
Visitors be only allo to enter the care set an appointment and follo registration.
The care provider be responsible that only a many visitor be allo that hygiene and distance rule can be maintained.
Visitors need to be register to enable contact tra cing.
Visitors must confirm that they have not kno be in contact a COVID -19 case, they themselves have not be test positively for COVID -19 and do not currently have symptom of a respiratory illness.
Children young than 14 years, people respiratory symptom and people be Contact person category 1 or 2 follo RKI contact trace advice be not allo to enter care settings.
Visitors be only allo in the outside area or specifically determined area for visits.
Resident ™s room be only be allo to be enter by visitor due to limited mobility of the resident or due other reason the resident cannot attend visitor areas.
Care provider need to provide opportunity for hand disinfection in dedicated meeting area and surface (doors, doorknobs..) that frequently get touch by visitor need to be clean repeatedly during the day.
Care provider need to ensure that contact bet visitor and other resident be minimised.
If available, it be advise to use separate entrance and to provide dedicate rout the care setting.
Visitors need to be inform in , sign and orally at their first visit of required hygiene measures.
Visitors need to mouth -nose protection during their entire ti me in the residential care setting.
Care provider need to develop a care set specific visitor concept and to adjust their hygiene concept accordingly.
There be no restriction for therapeutic, medical, judicial or pastoral visitor if they mouth -nose protection from enter to leave the care setting, unless these people be contact person of category 1 or 2 (RKI guidance).
69 Hessen In Hessen each resident can have visit per for one hour by one relative or a person that be important to the m if the residential care setting have a concept to protect resident from infection through visitor and a hygiene plan.
The contact detail and visit time of each visitor need to be documented.
Visits be not allo to take place if a COVID -19 case i s confirm a care setting.
During their visit, visitor must maintain a distance of at least to the resident, a mouth -nose protection provide by the care set or accept by them (at least surgery mask) and follow the hygiene rule s et out by the care setting.
These rule do not apply to people visit a person at the end -of-life.
Visitors have enter Germany by land, sea or air be not allo to enter residential care setting in Hessen.
70 Mecklenburg -Western Pomerania From 15 May resident of residential care setting be allo to have one fix visitor per day for a maximum of one hour.
The care set have to have develop an infection protection concept and can ensure the maintenance of hygiene standards.
These measure have be communicate the local health authority.
Every visitor be require to provide their contact detail on their first visit and visit time at consecutive visits.
69 70 sverbot -fuer -bestimmte -einrichtungen | Germany and the COVID -19 long -term care situation 42 Every visitor need to be inform or relevant protective and hygiene measure before their first contact the resident they visit.
The visitor need to confirm that they be symptom free ahead of each visit.
The care settings need to maintain a daily symptom diary for resident and staff.
Provided there be no active COVID -19 i nfection in the care setting.
71 Lo Saxony Already since 17 April visit in residential care setting be possible in Lo Saxony if they be in line individual and hygiene concept approve by the local health authority.
From 27 May on reside nt have the right to have visit by one name person.
Adherence to strict hygiene rule need to be maintained.
The regulation be due to be implement on 20 May.
72 North -Rhine Westphalia In North -Rhine Westphalia the ban for visitor lift in t ime for mother™s day on 10 May.
Visits be make possible through separate visiting areas, protective equipment and screening of visitors.
Residents can have up to t visitor in separate visiting rooms.
If the visit need to take place in the resident ™s room only one visitor can be permitted.
The length per visit be limit to a maximum of t hour per visit per day.
All visitor be registered, screened briefly for COVID -19 and inform about relevant protective measures.
73 Rhineland -Palatin ate Visits in residential care setting be possible since 7 May.
Resident can have one hour -long visit per day from a relative or other close person.
Visitors need to mouth -nose protection during the visit, disinfect their hand and maintain a distance of at least metres.
In addition, resident be allo to leave the care set on their o , accompany by a relative or other resident, if they be not infect COVID -19.
74 Saarland Since 4 May resident in residential care setting ca n meet relative and friend outdoors.
During the visit everyone need to adhere to metre distance rule and a mouth -nose protection.
Visits inside the residential care set be only possible if the care provider have provide a protection co ncept.
This may involve specific visit area the care set plexiglas panes.
75 The update regulation allow one registered visitor per resident per day for up to one hour.
Visitors need to adhere to protective measure and information on h ygiene measure need to take place regularly.
76 Saxony In Saxony visitor be only allo to visit resident in long -term care setting follo registration and approval.
Entrance depend on adherence to hygiene and organisational measure put in place by the care provider.
Visitors need to be limit in 71 .regierung - 72 -in -pflegeheimen -und-krank enhausern - -ausge - 73 -des -generellen -besuchsverbots -einrichtungen -der -pflege -und-der 74 -6203 -faell e-besuche -in -alten -und-pflegeheimen - -moeglich/ 75 -05-12-stand -corona - 76 ona -05-03-rechtsverordnung -?__blob= | Germany and the COVID -19 long -term care situation 43 number and time.
The care provider can coordinate the implementation of measure the local health authority.
Residents can meet visitor outdoors as long a they adhere to distance and hygiene rul es.
This regulation only apply if there be no reason against allo these visits, such a quarantine measures.
Residents be not allo to spend time at another place (.
a relative™s flat) unless they have receive prior approval by the care prov ider.
77 On 20 May Saxony announce enable visit in residential long -term care setting for close relatives.
78 Saxony -Anhalt From 11 May resident in long -term care setting allo to have one visit per day for one hour.
Children young than 16 year , people respiratory illness cannot be permitted, people a COVID -19 infection, people identify a contact person category 1 and 2 (RKI) or have be abroad (14 day since return).
Hygiene and distance rule must be adhere to during visi ts.
The management of the residential care set can limit or ban visit follo a risk assessment.
The relevant authority need to be inform if a visitor ban be invoked.
Visits for legal, pastoral, therapeutic or medical reason be allo .
All vi itors need to medical mouth -nose protection.
7980 Schles -Holstein Schles -Holstein announce plan to allow visitor in residential setting already on 30 April.
All residential care setting need to develop a concept for visitor for each specifi c care set base on current regulations.
The relevant health authority need to be inform about the concept for visitors.
Residents can only have one visitor (under specific circumstance one additional person may be allo to accompany the visitor) .
Visits need to be define for a specific period (maximal 2 hour per day).
The number of visitor permit at the same time depend on the size of the care set a distancing and hygiene rule need to be adhere to.
The entrance to the care sett ing need to be limit (ideally only one entrance).
Visitors should only be allo in specific area and should be signpost along specific routes.
Visitors acute respiratory illness and fever be not permi tted.
Hygiene and distancing rule need to be communicate appropriately and maintained.
Disinfectant and information on their use must be available at the entrance.
Visitors must register prior to the visit and sign that they adhere to hygiene and distance rule during their visit.
If visitor do fail to adhere to these rule follo a reminder, staff can ask visitor to leave and invoke a visitor ban for the relevant person.
Gifts and exchange of laundry need to be agree the member of staf f responsible for hygiene.
Visitors and resident (if possible) must mouth -nose protection.
Bins must be available for single -use items.
Visitors should be guide by a member of staff or a specially trained person to the visitor room.
77 -Allgemeinverfuegung -stationaere -Einrichtungen -2020-05- 78 79 - ..pdf 80 - Sachsen -Anhalt -.pdf | Germany and the COVID -19 long -term care situation 44 The document pr ovides guidance on ideal location, arrangement and organisation of visitor rooms.
If it be not possible to use the visitor room, visit can take place in the resident™s room under follo a set of precautions.
81 Thuringia Since 13 May resident in resid ential care setting in Thuringia be allo to have one register visitor per resident per day for one to t hours.
Visits be not allo from people young than 16 years, people respiratory illness, people be contact person to a COVID -19 case (RKI).
Visits be not allo if there be a current COVID -19 infection the care setting.
82 Measures to support domiciliary care Methods to protect care Baden -Württemberg Staff that have be travel from a high -risk area thin the last 14 day should not be .
Staff respiratory symptom be not allo to .
In these cases, there should be test for COVID -19.
If no single use disposable go available, reusable go can be used.
They need to be in a d isinfection laundry process.
It can be useful to have the same staff on the same route and to avoid rotation.
Visiting COVID -19 patient at the end of the tour could reduce the risk of spread (not obligatory) .
Berlin Care and support that doesn™t requ ire physical contact should be perform follo hand disinfection and by maintain 2m distance.
While these activity take place the person care need should be in a different room .
Personal care should be perform follo hand disinfection glove and mouth -nose protection.
During the care the carer should not speak the care recipient.
Leng th and extent of the task should be base on need and patient protection .
Brandenburg Ambulatory care in Brandenburg have receive special permission until 30 June 2020 to park in certain restricted area for up to t hour they provide care service .
Hamburg Contact bet carer and care r ecipient need to be minimise a professionally required; the number of carers per care recipient should be minimise .
Care staff have to reduce contact among each other as much a possible Care recipient and their house hold should be remind not to have receive visitors.
If other member of the household become ill they should consequently adhere to prevention measure or if that no possible mouth nose protection.
Care recipient and their household member or othe r unpaid carers should inform the ambulatory care service if there be a suspicion of a potential COVID -19 infection .
In case of staff shorting, ambulatory service should make use of the extended regulation around hours, use staff from other part of the organisation, use agency staff, indicate need for staff to health authority .
If ambulatory service be unable to provide all care service needed, they should explore some care recipient may be able to receive care from family members.
81 - ;jsessionid= -master?__blob = 82 -verordnungen#c14180 | Germany and the COVID -19 long -term care situation 45 Care service point may be able to support family in navigate support st ructures; the relevant authority should be inform in these case .
Rhineland -Palatinate Care staff can be allocate to in ambulatory a a residential ca re set to enable great flexibility in planning .
If relative or others be to take on medical care task this need to be coordinate the relevant medical doctor and the care recipient .
If medical care service cannot be provide the provider need to inform the care recipient or their legal carer, the prescribing GP and the health insurance immediately.
The ambulance service be to be contact in medical emergency .
Thuringia A ne report state that ambulatory care provider in Thuringia struggle a the number of client drop.
In many cases, relative be stay home due to the COVID -19 pandemic and take on relevant care tasks.
This may in part be to reduce financial cost in the family but also to reduce the risk of infecti on.
Several provider already have to apply for reduced hour (Kurzarbeit) to get their company through this situation 83 .
Support for domiciliary care provider On 27 March the German Ministry of Health (Bundesgesundheitsministerium) announce a funding and support package to help care institution during the COVID -19 pandemic.
The measure outline include that the t he care insurance provider additionally support provider to avoid gap in supply of pay home care .
On 3 March, the National Association of Statutory Health Insurance Funds (GKV Spitzenverband) issue a statement on the rescue package to support care provider during the pandemic .
Measures to support care of people intellectual disability and autistic adult Guidance for care s to support people intellectual disability and a dults in the autistic spectrum Advice for pay carers if COVID -19 symptom occur Measures to support unpaid carers Methods to support unpaid carers Thuringia/ Berlin Thuringia and Berlin be start an init iative to increase the basic security pay for people in need.
This recognise that people that usually rely on support of food bank and other 83 The federal government have enable a law to make the use of short -term easy for long -term care providers.
Only 10 per cent of employee of a company need to be affect by loss of for the provider to apply for short -term .
| Germany and the COVID -19 long -term care situation 46 supportive intervention cannot access these services, may make life even more expensive.
This top -up benefit people of all ages.
84 Federal Government On 14 May the federal government agree the second law for the protection of the population during an epidemic situation of national significance (z Gesetz zum Schutz der Bevölkerung bei einer epidemis chen Lage von nationaler Trag ).
This law include additional provision for unpaid carers Under normal circumstance family member can receive up to 10 day financial support to compensate for a loss of income if a sudden care need emerge the family and the person need to organise care in the community.
The new law apply until 30 September 2020 and provide family carers care support money (Pflegeunterst ützungsgeld) for up to 20 day in situation a gap in the community car e their relative normally receive occurs.
The right to stay a from due to an acute care situation the o family also be extend from 10 to 20 day until 30 September 2020.
Additional measure to make the caregiver leave act (Pflegeze itgesetz) the family care leave act (Familienpflegezeitgesetz) more flexible to respond to the pandemic be be undertaken.
85 Bavaria For 20 year there have be specialist agency in Bavaria to provide advice for unpaid carers.
These agency have bee n advise to be available via telephone and e -mail .
Berlin Testing only if there be a reasonable suspicion (symptoms & contact to COVID -19 case or recent stay in an at risk area in the past 14 day .
There be a number of neighbourhood initiative that offer support .
Sources of support for people care need and unpaid carers be care support centres.
These centre offer neutral advice free of charge.
These service currently only happen over the telephone.
The a vailability of these service have be extend in term of hour and be also available on Sunday and on bank holiday .
AOK (sickness fund) care academ ic: the provision of advice on care at home during the COVID -19 pandemic .
Voluntary visit to people care need have to stop, ho , contact be m aintained via telephone and advice also remain available .
Care in distress, this source of advice can help people experience violence of conflict in their care.
The hour for advice have be extend to support unpaid carers during this period .
Silvernet Œ A telephone support service for lonely and isolated people .
Brandenburg During the COVID -19 pandemic (until .2020) people care need in their everyday life can now also receive financ ial support for service they receive telephonically.
This service have be put in place to enable people care need to live independently for as long a possible and to provide support for unpaid carers.
The minister of social affair explain that support to enable everyday life for people care need usually be offer through group intervention or hourly support in their o home.
Due to the risk of infection this be currently not possible.
Some of this contact time, ho , could alternativ ely be provide via telephone or virtually to reduce the risk of social isolation .
North -Rhine Westphalia People care need (levels 1 to 5) and be l iving at home can claim up to •125 per month from their care insurance for support or for relief of their unpaid carer.
Those 84 -euro -mehr -fuer -besonders -bed uerftige 85 -19-bevoelkerungsschutz - | Germany and the COVID -19 long -term care situation 47 care level 2 to 5 can use up to 40 per cent of the value of in -kind support to finance support daily living.
This money can be save up over several month and move for into the other half of the calendar year.
This funding can be use for group or individual support, household help, company to go shopping, company for administrative, medical or religious appointments, support to enable social contacts, company to attend cultural event or other leisure activities.
Due to COVID -19 eligible service have be expand to ‚services to the front door™ (shopping, run errands, pick -up or delivery services, organisation o f administrative matters, personal conversation via telephone, skype or e -mail) until .2020 .
In addition, requirement for reimbursable neighbourhood help have be eased.
The person provide neighbourh ood support do not require to provide a certificate until .2020 .
Rhineland -Palatinate Advice for vulnerable groups: reduce visitor to a minimum.
Saxony People care need can claim up to •125 per month from their care insurance to reimburse neighbourhood supporter for their help (shopping, laundry, food delivery, run errand (post, pharmacy).
Usually neighbourhood supporter need to have recognis ed skill (participation in course, proof of experience) to be eligible for the scheme.
The requirement to complete a course to be eligible for reimbursement have be lift until 30 September 2020 .
Advice for unpaid carers if COVID -19 symptom occur Addit ional advice for unpaid carers of people learn disability and autism Community care service Day and night care service Baden -Württemberg Day and night care setting have to close.
They can only provide care for individual person in emergen cy situation 86 (.2020 -.2020) .
They can only provi de care for individual person in emergency situation Berlin Day care setting have to close.
They can only provide care for individual person in emergency situation 86 This applies in their unpaid carers in critical infrastr ucture, no alternative can be arrange or if this loss of care pose a (health) risk to the care -for, there be a medical prescription for specific type of care.
| Germany and the COVID -19 long -term care situation 48 Bremen Day care option be closed .Services be available for in emergency situation 2 .
This emergency care must be keep to a minimum.
It can also be provide to people only recently develop care need .
Day care continue to be closed, unless for people require emergency care (12 May) 87 Hamburg Day care setting have to close and can only provide emergency care 2 .
88 Hessen Day and night care centre remain closed until at least 3 May.
Emergency care can be provide if necessary 2.
This do not apply if the care recipient develop symptoms, or have have contact an infected person in the past 14 day .
Lo Saxony Day care service be can celled.
Services can only be provide to people in emergency situation 2 .
89 Rhineland -Palatinate Day care be open a reduced offer and under responsibility of the care provider.
90 Saarland Part -time day or night time service remain closed .
91 Saxony Day care centre remain closed unless for emergency care.
92 Saxony -Anhalt Day or night care service be closed, unless people have an emergency need 2.
Management of the institution decide on case by case basis .
93 Schles -Holstein Day or night care service be closed, unless people have an emergency need 2 .
Vol 397 June 19, 2021 A beautiful idea: how COVAX have fall short COVAX meant to supply COVID-19 vaccine for all base on solidarity and equity.
Instead, it rely on rich countries™ to share their doses.
Launched 1 year ago, the COVAX facility conceive a an ﬁunparalleled and ambitiousﬂ attempt to create a global pro curement mechanism to supply COVID-19 vaccine to all country in the .
It hail a a ﬁglobal, heroic eortﬂ that ﬁtranscend the limit of human ingenuityﬂ to ensure that vaccine development progress as fast a possible, at ﬁa speed, scale, and access never before see in human historyﬂ.
Underlying everything, accord to early description by Gavi, the Vaccine Alliance, it ﬁsingle mind in it goal to ensure equitable access to COVID-19 vaccinesﬂ.
At the ple summit for COVAX on June 2, 2021, host by Japan, Gavi nally reach it US$8 3 billion ask for the procurement and delivery of vaccine for the 92 eligible low- income and middle-income country (LMICs) this year.
Ho , even full financing, the COVAX roll-out have move much more slo than that in high-income country (HICs).
Speaker after speaker at the summit lament the gross inequity in access to vaccines.
ﬁToday, ten country have administer 75% of all COVID-19 vaccines, but, in poor countries, health and people underlie condition cannot access them.
This be not only manifestly unjust, it be also self-defeatingﬂ, UN secretary general António Guterres tell the gathering.
ﬁCOVAX have deliver over 72 million dos to 125 countries.
But that be far less than 172 million it should have deliver by Of the 2 1 billion COVID-19 vaccine dos administer so far, COVAX have be responsible for less than 4%.
ﬂBorn out of solidarityﬂ Gavin Yamey at Duke University (Durham, NC, USA) part of a group, convene by Gavi in early 2020, to discuss the design of COVAX.
ﬁIt a beautiful idea, bear out of solidarityﬂ, he said.
ﬁUnfortunately, it didn™t happen–Rich country behave than anyone™s COVAX, manage by Gavi, along the Coalition for Epidemic Preparedness Innovations and WHO, design to stand on t legs: one for HICs, pay for their o vaccines, and the other for 92 lo -income countries, dos be nanced by donor aid.
In the so-called self-financing leg of COVAX, HICs ask to pay upfront by mid-September, 2020, for the option to buy vaccine for their o populations.
The UK, for example, pay £71 million for 27 million dos from COVAX, and Canada pay CA$220 million for 15 million doses.
Australia, New Zealand, Nor , and South Korea also buy vaccine option from COVAX a self-nancing the other leg of COVAX, vaccine for lo -income country be finance donor grant through an Advance Market Commitment (AMC).
The poor of the 92 country receive them at no cost.
Team Europe (led by Germany) and the USA have together provide US$5 billion to the COVAX AMC, Japan have give US$1 billion, and the UK, US$735 million.
Most of these fund have be ple only in the past few grand idea of COVAX that the combination of these t fund streamsŠthe self-financed part and the aid-nanced AMCŠ give the facility the mean to invest in research and development of several promising vaccine candidates.
Additionally, a a pooled procurement mechanism, COVAX have the nancial muscle a a buyer to drive do price for all participants.
Once any of the COVAX portfolio vaccine have successfully undergone clinical trial and prove themselves to be both safe and eective, both self-nancing and AMC country be allocate vaccine at the same rate, proportional to their total population be ﬁquite literally a lifelineﬂ for self-financing country that have not make any bilateral deal vaccine manufacturers, Gavi™s chief executive officer Seth Berkley explain last autumn.
Ho , by August, 2020, the USA have already enter into seven bilateral deal six company for more than 800 million doses, enough to vaccinate 140% of it population, accord to the Duke University Launch and Scale Speedometer.
The EU close behind access to half a billion dos secure through t deals.
The UK have buy into ve bilateral deal give it access to 270 million doses, equivalent to 225% of it population.
These early investment by rich country in multiple vaccine secure them a place at the front of the queue.
Because COVAX do not have the mean to compete, it push to the back.
Writing in a blog post earlier this year, Andrea Taylor, manage the Launch and Scale Speedometer vaccine tracker, have say that ﬁCOVAX premise on an all-for-one-and-one-for-all approach to defeat the pandemicﬂ, add that ﬁthis have lead to the best outcome for everyone and our best hope for end the pandemic quickly.
But also know from experience that the doesn™t really this .ﬂ Everyone know that rich country enter into bilateral vaccine deals, Yamey said.
But it hop that they also buy into COVAX a insurance World Report For the Launch and Scale Speedometer see For Andrea Taylor™s blog post see learned-one-year-covax For more on the statement of the European Commission see .europarl.
the OECD Development Co-operation Report see .oecd- res= .
Vol 397 June 19, 2021 2323in case some vaccine candidate do not prove successful.
In the end, ﬁthree dozen country bypass COVAX and make huge deal directly manufacturers.
And since they clear the shelves, there not enough dos leave for COVAXﬂ, he said.
S As rich country busily sign bilateral agreement individual vaccine manufacturer and the interest in engage COVAX faded, Gavi give up on the original idealistic approach and make t key concession that s the deal for self- nancing , all country to receive equal treatment by COVAX.
They have access to vaccine at the same time and participant be allo to purchase enough dos to cover 20% of their populations.
Moreover, participant to be ﬁproduct agnosticﬂ, in the sense that COVAX decide on the product and allocation of volume of doses.
Breaking the principle of equal treatment, Gavi create a second category of purchase option for self- nancing countries, call the Optional Purchase Arrangement, give buyer the possibility to opt in or out of certain products; basically, give them more choice about vaccine they receive.
That is, if a country offer vaccine A but do not it, it not be oblige to take it, and could instead save it option for purchase of another product.
ﬁThe trade-off for these participants, have great choice, be that they be require to pay a high proportion of the total cost per dose upfrontﬂ, state a Gavi explainer.
This, Kate Elder at Médecins Sans Frontières said, do in response to pressure from the UK.
ﬁGavi bent over back and let the UK basically dictate another option for join COVAXﬂ, she said.
A second concession make by Gavi to potential self-nancing countriesŠbut not open to lo -income countriesŠ an increase in the volume of vaccine they permit to purchase.
While country eligible for the AMC intend to receive vaccine to cover up to 20% of their populations, the ceiling for self-nancing country raise to 50%.
Elder point to the blatant inequity build into this arrangement.
She say Gavi lose valuable time last year coax rich country to join COVAX.
ﬁThe theory that you get every country to buy into this global procurement mechanism seem very naiveﬂ, she said.
ﬁCOVAX sacrifice speed to convince government to join the initiative, clearly [those governments] go to take other step to secure vaccines.
I think acquiesce to the ‚suggestions™ of a small group of HICs lead to the overall of COVAX, because it introduce a lot of uncertainty in the mechanism itself–The delay timeline also lead to a delay in the The report of the Independent Panel for Pandemic Preparedness and Response also point to the harm cause by the slow mobilisation of resource for COVAX: ﬁHad COVAX have sufficient and readily available early funding it have be well able to secure enough immediate supply to meet it aimsﬂ, it states.
ﬁIf have secure nancing earlier, then could have lock in dos earlier, a oppose to the second half of this year COVAX™s volume start ramp upﬂ, Gavi™s spokesperson tell The Lancet .Yamey say the concession that oered to nation ﬁspeak to the eort to incentivise rich country to join COVAX.
For future pandemics, have to gure out how to overcome this problem.
I think that need a compulsory mechanism every nation participate now.
Other , you need to nd strong incentives– This be a dicult nut to Gavi™s spokesperson say that ﬁCOVAX set up a a multilateral mechanism, and active engagement and collaboration have be it drive force since June, 2020, it launched.
COVAX™s governance structure be design so that lo - income economy and self-nancing country all have a say in the strategic direction of the Gavi™s predicament The failure to entice country to join COVAX in large number have leave the manager of the facility in an a situation.
On one hand, not enough self- nancing participant join COVAX to give it the massive buying po that hoped.
On the other, even though COVAX be desperately short of vaccine, the facility be now contractually oblige to reserve one in ve dos for a few rich countries.
Vol 397 June 19, 2021 have supply about 80 million dos to LMICs; 22 million dos have go to the access inequity have , Gavi have have to justify send vaccine to country that have already vaccinate a large portion of their population at the same time a delivery to the very poor country have barely begun.
This uncomfortable predicament be palpable in Gavi™s message about COVAX, now rarely, if ever, mention the self- nancing part of the facility.
Although Gavi have produce numerous press release about delivery of vaccine to LMICs, start the shipment of 600 000 dos of the Oxford UniversityŒAstraZeneca vaccine to Ghana on Feb 24, 2021, there no announcement Canada allocate 1 62 million dos of the same vaccine earlier that month, and no fanfare 500 000 dos of the PzerŒBioNTech vaccine assign by COVAX to the UK in April.
Oxfam criticise Canada for the delivery, accuse the Government of take dos from the poor it have sign bilateral deal manufacturer for enough vaccine to cover four time the country™s population.
ﬁCanada should not be take the COVAX vaccine from poor nation to alleviate political pressure at homeﬂ, Diana Sarosi at Oxfam Canada said.
Ho , strictly speaking, Canada merely follo through on the term of it agreement COVAX.
Public service and procurement minister Anita Anand say a much she defend the move in a comment to CBC.
Canada be ﬁentitled under our agreement COVAX to draw do on the commitment that make them back in the summerﬂ, she said.
Similarly, respond to a question in parliament in March, 2021, the UK under-secretary for health and social care Nadhim Zaha explain that COVAX have enable ﬁhigh- and upper-middle income country to pool investment in potential vaccine candidatesﬂ.
Both the Canadian and British government point to their generous donation to the AMC part of COVAX, be dedicate to supply vaccine to poor countries.
The self-financing of COVAX have also disappear from the bu of the Access to COVID-19 Tools Accelerator (ACT-A), of the COVAX facility be a part.
The rst iteration of the bu in September, 2020, have a total financial frame of US$38 billion.
By March, 2021, the ask have drop to US$33 billion.
Nor ™s Global Health Ambassador John-Arne Røttingen, a Gavi board member, explain this happened: ﬁThe fundraise necessary for the COVAX facility and the fundraising for ACT-A it come to vaccine be only relevant for the AMC and not for the self-nancing countries, since that be mobilise collective nance.
That be take that out of the bu .ﬂ COVAX need more dos COVAX now aim to roll out 2 3 billion dos of COVID-19 vaccine by early 2022.
According to the late COVAX global supply forecast, date April 7, 2021, 485 million dos of these be earmark for self-nancing countries, 1 8 billion dos go to the 92 lo -income countries, at least 13 billion of those dos available at no cost to their governments.
This volume of dos be not assured: ﬁIf the forecast come to passŠand that be a big if, uncertainty around capacity, funding, and country readinessŠthis mean that COVAX should be able to reach at least 27 per cent of the population of lo -income country across the in 2021, above the 20 per cent target it set upon it inceptionﬂ, Gavi states.
Many have question the original COVAX target of 20%.
Even 27% coverage leave country that be reliant on COVAX short of the volume of vaccine they need to achieve herd immunity.
ﬁI have al think that the 20% target unfair from the start.
No high-income country tolerate vaccinate only 20% of it population by the end of this yearﬂ, say La Gostin at Georgeto University.
Comparing the 20% vac -cination target for LMICs the 50% coverage that oered to HICs through the self-nancing , he said: ﬁWe can™t have double WHO estimate that the need at least 11 billion dos of vaccine to stamp out the pandemic, and the European Commission have that new variant of SARS-CoV-2 that be more transmissible and more deadly could ﬁ[push] the demand far beyond the 11 billion dos originally estimatedﬂ.
Underlining the scale of the challenge, The People™s Vaccine AllianceŠa coalition of organisation include Oxfam and Amnesty International, health experts, and leaders, that have lobby for a on COVID-19- related patentsŠestimates that, at the current rate, low-income country could take 57 year to fully vaccinate their populations, G7 country might reach that milestone in the next 6 this backdrop, and recog -nising that country have order more vaccine dos than they need, dose sharing have emerge a a to radically increase COVAX™s access to doses.
As of late May, 2021, HICs have promise to share 200 million dos COVAX.
Many, include the International Monetary Fund and the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation, argue that 1 billion dos can and should be share this year.
The Independent Panel recommend that at least 1 billion vaccine dos be share by no late than Sept 1, 2021, and more than 2 billion dos by mid-2022.
There therefore huge expec -tations for last ™s G7 summit, both ﬁ‚Rich country behave than anyone™s nightmares.™ﬂ
German Recovery and Resilience Plan Draft Preface German Recovery and Resilience Plan Preface The Covid-19 crisis constitute one of the big challenge in the history of the European Union and the Federal Republic of Germany in term of it impact on health, society and, in particular, the economy.
The European Union have take robust action in response to the crisis.
With the recovery instrument Next Gener -ation EU, amount to • 750 billion, and it large funding in strument Œ the Recovery and Resilience Facility (RRF), • billion Œ the foundation have be lay to emerge together from the crisis even strong than before.
The German government also take s and decisive action mitigate the economic and social impact of the pandemic and allo the country to get back on track after the crisis.
In June 2020, a comprehensive economic stimulus package launched, combine stimulus measure important investment in the future.
With the German Recovery and Resilience Plan (GRRP), the federal government contributes to overcome the Covid-19 crisis and to safeguard the future of Germany and Europe.
With it country-specific recommendation (CSRs) issue in the context of the European Semester, the EU have give Germany important input for the reform that need to be made.
The German government be take these recommendation into account.
It have already implement multiple reform on the basis of the CSRs.
The reform and investment present the frame of this plan be fully in line the CSRs direct at Germany.
The federal government™s agenda present in this recovery plan correspond to the key objective of the European recovery plan Next Generation EU and it Recovery and Resilience Facility.
The focus of the GRRP be on tackle the t major challenge of our time, namely climate change and the digital trans formation.
As part of this, the climate-friendly measure cover a broad spectrum, from decar -bonisation by mean of rene hydrogen, to climate-friendly mobility, all the to climate- friendly construction.
The aspiration of digitalisa -tion affect almost all the measure in the recovery plan.
Beyond investment in the rapid digitalisation of infrastructure and the private sector, the focus be also on data a the fundamental raw material for the future.
The plan also include a national digital education initiative.
Investment in education, innovation and the energy transition also pay out after the crisis regard to an economy and society become re silient and future-proof.
In this , the use of the European grant for investment purpose make an impor -tant contribution to our prosperity and to ensure the long-term sustainability of public finances.
An effective community be the hallmark of a resilient economy and society.
Covid-19 have make crystal clear how important a strong social state is.
The hardest-hit and the most vulnerable group need our support.
For this reason, a particular focus be on meas -ures to promote social inclusion and participation in the labour market, take gender equality into account.
Social resilience also include strengthen the public health system and foster a pandemic protection scheme.
Against that background, highly effective social infrastructure element that protect the health of the population constitute an integral component of the GRRP.
Structural change and a future orient approach not be possible a capable public administra -tion that act effectively and efficiently, particularly facilitating and push for investment in the future.
The public administration at the level of local authorities, the Länder and the Federation have prove it capability in the Covid-19 crisis.
Germany be continue to on accelerate and digitalise process and reduce exist capacity bottleneck in order to strengthen public and private investment activity.
The current draft GRRP translate the political priority into measure that be appropriate for address both the key domestic challenge of the future and the priority area of the European recovery instrument.
In that sense it form the basis for a consultation the European Commission, include on still-to-be-defined goal and milestone for the individual measures, the aim of finalise the GRRP in connection the National Reform Programme in April 2021, that in view of the final negotiate regulation on the RRF, for submission to the European Commission.
Details of focus area for measure and component 20Estimated cost of the plan 21Focus area 1: Climate policy and energy transition Decarbonisation use rene hydrogen in particular Climate-friendly mobility Climate-friendly renovation and construction 26Focus area 2: Digitalisation of theeconomy and infrastructure Data a the raw material of the future Digitalisation of the economy 30Focus area 3: Digitalisation ofeducation Digitalisation of education 32Focus area 4: Strengthening ofsocial inclusion Strengthening of social inclusion 34Focus area 5: Strengthening ofapandemic- resilient healthcaresystem Strengthening of a pandemic-resilient healthcare system 37Focus area 6: Modern public administration and reduce barrier to investment Modern public administration Reducing barrier to investment 406.
Institutional governance of the German Recovery and Resilience Plan 42List of table Table 1: General government bu balance and debt 15Table 2: Estimated cost of the plan 21Table 3: Decarbonisation use rene hydrogen in particular 23Table 4: Climate-friendly mobility 25Table 5: Climate-friendly renovation and construction 27Table 6: Data a the raw material of the future 29Table 7: Digitalisation of the economy 30Table 8: Digitalisation of education 32Table 9: Strengthening of social inclusion 35Table 10: Strengthening of a pandemic-resilient healthcare system 37Table 11: Modern public administration 39Table 12: Reducing barrier to investment 41List of figure Figure 1: Government gross fix capital formation 13Figure 2: Trend in the Maastricht debt-to-GDP ratio from 2008 to 2024 151.
Summary 7German Recovery and Resilience Plan SummaryThe European Recovery and Resilience Facility (RRF) serve to promote the economic, social and territorial cohesion of the European Union, to strengthen economic and social resilience, to mitigate the social and economic impact of the crisis, and to support the green and digital transitions.
In order to obtain fund from the RRF, Member States have to submit a national recovery and resilience plan (Articles 14 and 15 of the Proposal for a Regula -tion of the European Parliament and of the Council estab lishing a Recovery and Resilience Facility).
The Draft German Recovery and Resilience Plan (GRRP) contain proposal from the federal government for measure that serve to achieve the objective of the facility.
Germany be face major challenge in the area of climate protection.
Large-scale global decarbonisa -tion be essential in order to halt human-made climate change.
Achieving decarbonisation a decline in quality of life, and link decarbonisation to a new impetus for value creation and employment on the road to the post-fossil age, be some of the most important task of economic policy.
Promotion of climate-friendly action be therefore a key pillar of the GRRP.
Three component be dedicate to this 1 European Flagships, Communication from the Commission to the European Parliament, the European Council, the Council, the European Central Bank, the European Economic and Social Committee, the Committee of the Regions and the European Investment Bank, Annual Sustainable Gro Strategy, 2021, COM 575 final.
task alone, from decarbonisation by use renew able hydrogen in particular (), to cli mate-friendly mobility () and climate- friendly construction and renovation ().
These programme element thus also address three key European flagship initiatives 1 (see info box): Po up, Renovate and Recharge and refuel.
In total, about 40 % of the expenditure in this draft plan contribute to climate action, thereby fulfil a key objective for the national recovery plans.
The successful digitalisation of the economy and infrastructure be of crucial importance to ensure that Germany and Europe be ready for the future.
For this reason, the second focal point of the GRRP be the digital transformation.
The t component that be in quantitative term most important be ﬁdata a the raw material of the futureﬂ () and the promotion of the digital transition of the economy ().
The German plan in that sense make an important contribution to the European flagship goal of Connect, Modernise and Scale-up.
In total, over 40 % of expenditure contributes to the digital transition.
Hence, the requested European target of 20 % for digital be exceed by a large margin in the current plan.
8German Recovery and Resilience Plan SummaryInfo box: EU flagship Flagship initiative Objective by 2025 1.
Po up Clean, future-proof technology be introduce at an early stage and the use of rene energy be accelerate through net integration and interconnectivity.
The foundation for hydrogen lead market and infrastructure be lay by mean of the build-up and sector integration of almost 40 % of the 500 GW of electricity that need to be generate from rene energy source by 2030, the creation of 6 GW of electrolysis capacity and the gener -ation and transportation of one million tonne of rene hydrogen by 2025.
Renovate Improving energy and resource efciency in public and private building help to achieve the EU™s climate targets, create job and promote digital development.
The aim be to double the renovation rate by 2025.
Recharge and refuel Support for clean technology for the use of sustainable, smart mean of transport, support for charge station and lling stations, and for the expansion of public transport net .
By 2025, one million of the three million charge station need by 2030 and 50 % of the 1,000 hydrogen station needed, shall be provided.
Connect Only 44 % of household currently have access to net very high capacity, net - coverage in rural area be considerably lo .
The rapid expansion of fast broadband servic -es for the benet of all region and households, include bre-optic and 5G net , and the development of quantum encrypt communication be of crucial importance in order to ensure the high possible territorial coverage and to ensure the strategic autonomy of the EU.
The measure provide for in the Recovery and Resilience Facility should ensure the maximum possible 5G coverage in all area by 2025.
Modernise EU identication service and digital public service should be modernise and accessibleto everyone.
With secure, EU- electronic identication and authentication respectto government agency and private operators, citizen gain control over their online identity and their data, and access to digital online service be make easier.
The public adminis -tration and public service (including the judicial and healthcare systems) become more efcient.
By 2025, a European digital identity (eID) be introduced, and interoperable, personalise and user-friendly digital public service be provided.
Scale-up The cloud capacity of European industry must be increased, and po , sustainable proces -sors must be developed.
By 2025, the production of semiconductor in Europe be doubled, and processor that be ten time more energy-efcient be produced.
This rapidly advance the use of connect vehicles, and the use of advanced cloud service and big data be double (from the current level of 16 %).
Reskill and upskill Investment in retrain and further training measure and reform should be target to digital skill and general and vocational training in all age groups.
In 2019, 42 % of Europeans lack basic digital skills.
By 2025, the proportion of those age bet 16 and 74 year digital skill should increase to 70 %.
Education system need to be adapt to the challenge of the 21st century by mean of a signicant improvement in pupils™ digital skills.
The proportion of 13- and 14-year-old pupil performance in the area of computer and IT skills be below average fall to under 15 %, and priority be give to disadvantage groups, and in particular young people by mean of high-quality employment opportunity and vocational education and training.
By 2025, four out of ve people have complete vocational training should be in employment, and three out of ve people should be complete further training measure in .
9German Recovery and Resilience Plan Education (including basic and further education, training and requalification) be of high importance for long-term potential gro and creation.
The Covid-19 crisis have revealed, not for the first time, that Germany be face considerable challenge in the field of digital literacy in particular.
This concern both device infrastructure a a the associated plat -forms and competences.
A digital education initiative () exploit the opportunity and potential that digitalisation be able to offer to indi -viduals and society, by open up equal educational opportunity irrespective of family background or ethnic origin.
In addition, the promotion of the future labour market opportunity ensure success possibil -ities for all young people.
The GRRP be thus make an important contribution to the EU flagship Reskill and Covid-19 crisis have highlight the importance of social cohesion in overcome serious crises.
Although Germany have a strong sense of community and comparatively high level of social protection, the Covid-19 pandemic have make it apparent that the hardest-hit and most vulnerable group require target support.
Therefore, an important goal of the recovery plan be to strengthen social inclusion, in particular by improve condition for participation in the labour market and hence for appropriate gro , and by ensure that the pension system be sustainable simultaneously secure adequate pensions.
enhances social inclusion and contributes to three EU flagship initiatives: Reno -vate, Modernise and Reskill and upskill.
By fund the accelerate research and develop -ment of urgently need vaccine against Covid-19, the GRRP contribute to urgent effort to fight the pandemic.
Although Germany have so far prove good than average at cushion the effect of the pandemic on the healthcare sector, the crisis has, ho , also reveal structural challenge for the German healthcare system ().
To ensure that it be equip for the future, significant action be require in area of the public health service that be relevant to the pandemic, but also regard to the further development of the hospital sector.
The public health service be strengthen in digital and technical terms, to ensure a long-term improve -ment in it resilience a an important pillar of the public healthcare system in Germany.
Hospitals can take advantage of a targeted support programme to make themselves more future-ready, again a focus on digitalisation.
In Germany, the state have prove to be effective and capable of take action during the crisis.
Ho , experience have also sho that transformation and a for -looking approach cannot succeed a public administration that keep pace new development and in some case can even provide the impetus for change.
The first component of the measure () therefore focus on increase digitalisation in the public adminis -tration, but also on build up infrastructure that enable identity to be establish on the Web assistance from the major platforms.
This component take into account the EU flagship Modernise.
Reducing barrier to investment be also key to modernise the country (.).
This component focus on effective regulation that encourage innovation and on a service-oriented public administration.
It therefore implement a major country-specific recommendation aim at Germany.
Financial frame 11German Recovery and Resilience Plan Financial frame When dra up the GRRP, the federal government be in a close policy dialogue the European Commission the aim of identify project and reform meas -ures that have a good chance of be implement effectively and that support the objective of the RRF.
The volume of the measure include in this draft plan exceed the fiscal envelope that be currently projected, in the clear kno that adjustment have to be make in the course of dra up the final Recovery and Resilience Plan, take into account the provision of the final regulation and the increase specificity of many measures.
It must also be bear in mind that there may be shift in emphasis in subsequent year regard to reform and long- term investments, may require amendment to the plan the frame of Article 18 of the Proposal for Recovery and Resilience Facility.
In accordance the conclusion of the European Council of July 2020, fund from the RRF can be commit in the year from 2021 to 2023 and spend up to 2026.
According to current estimate base on the European Commission™s autumn forecast, Germany be entitle to subsidy of around • billion from the RRF, of • billion (70 %) be commit for the year and • billion (30 %) be commit for 2023 (in 2018 prices) (Article 11 of the Proposal for a Regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council establish a Re covery and Resilience Facility).
Calculated at current prices, the RRF fund come to approximately •25 ½ billion, include around • billion in and about • billion from 2023 on .
It must be bear in mind that the 30 % tranche for the year from 2023 on could change significantly if the key macro -economic data in the EU Member States be revised.
Unless state other , all information hereinafter be give in current prices.
In order for fund to be dra on, predefined milestone and target need to be met; these need to be implement by July 2026 at the from other NGEU funds, such a from the Just Transition Fund, be not include in the frame of this recovery plan.
These fund also contribute to the financing of important trans -formative tasks, particularly in the area of structural adjustments, and should therefore be take into account in an overall evaluation of German poli -cies in this area.
Nevertheless, a co-financing via other EU fund for planned measure be addition -ally possible, provide that they comply the guideline for the relevant European funds, and in this respect be also report accordingly.
Further -more, a quite substantial co-financing be provide in individual case by the German Länder and the local authority for certain measure at the federal level finance by the RRF.
The federal government measure request here thus create clear positive incentive for the Länder and the municipalities, a a for the private sector, therefore leverage the effectiveness of the measure of this plan.
The GRRP measure be already include in the 2021 federal bu (adopted by the German Bundestag on 11 December 2020) and in the medium-term financial plan for the period up to 2024, be to be update in early 2021 a part of the budg -etary benchmark decision for the next financial plan.
The provision in the financial plan for the implementation of the economic stimulus package be to be use primarily for the GRRP measures.
With a view to the fiscal frame create by the federal bu and the financial plan, the measure announce here must be classify a provisional from a fiscal vie .
A definitive review of the bu specification be carry out before the final recovery plan be produced.
Linking the plan the European Semester 13German Recovery and Resilience Plan Linking the plan the European Semester The measure in the Recovery and Resilience Plan take into account all the relevant country- specific recommendation from the European Semester process for the year 2019 and 2020 (see info boxes).
The plan thus supplement the comprehen -sive information system of the National Reform Programme (in the context of the Macroeconomic Imbalance Procedure, for example, but also regard to the Sustainable Development Goals), a a report the scope of the Draft Bu Plan and the Stability Programme ( respect to fiscal policy recommendations).
The country-specific recommendation for both 2019 and 2020 call on Germany to increase it investment activity.
The measure include in the GRRP from the federal government™s economic stimulus and future development package raise investment spending to a historic level.
There be a focus on investment in digitalisation and in emissions-free energy and mobility.
As as investment in technology and innovation and fundamental reform in the area of data infrastructure (), the funding priority of digitalisation cover the area of education ( and ), the economy (), public administration ( and compo -nents and ) and the healthcare system (compo -).
In addition, climate action be a major focus of the investment contain in the GRRP, include green hydrogen a a drive technology (), electric mobility () and energy-efficient building renovation ().
The measure present in the recovery plan be thus embed in a for -looking national investment strategy that systematically implement the recom -mendations aim at Germany.
Investment spending be be significantly increase (see figure 1) a ten-year investment programme, the EU fund available through the RRF simultaneously help to provide last fiscal support for this investment strategy and allow for a frontloading of investment measures.
This help to modernise infrastructure, increase productivity and improve overall economic gro potential.
The comprehensive investment measure be supple -mented and make more effective by far-reaching reforms, particularly in the context of the public administration.
For example, the possibility of a joint initiative Partnerschaft Deutschland be be pursue ().
The aim be to systemati -cally identify barrier to the outflow of fund at the various level of the public administration and to develop concrete proposal for solution on this basis.
On 2 December 2020, the federal government and the Länder agree for the first time on a detailed programme for a public administration that be efficient, citizen-friendly and business-friendly; the programme develop measure to simplify legal matter and speed up planning and infrastructure projects.
The Investment Acceleration Act (Inves -titionsbeschleunigungsgesetz) recently pass by the Bundestag aim in particular to avoid duplicate revie of major investment projects.
These reform address the key country-specific recommendation that barrier in the area of public and private invest -ment activity should be reduced.
Figure 1: Government gross fix capital formation (in % of GDP and average gro rate) Sources: until 2019: Federal Statistical Office, November 2020 figures; from 2020 on : Federal Ministry of Finance projection, last updated December 2020.
14German Recovery and Resilience Plan Significant measure of the GRRP comprehen -sively strengthen the effectiveness and digitalisation of the public administration.
A specific component be dedicate to this issue (), include important reform relate to public administrative service in the form of the European identity ecosystem, the implementation of the Online Access Act and the modernisation of regis -ters.
Further groundbreaking reform be plan in this area the digital pension overview () and the digitalisation of the public health service ().
In addition, the 2019 country-specific recommen -dations require Germany to a) reduce disincentive to more hour (particularly for low- and second earners), strengthen the condition that support high gro respect the role of the social partners, and c) take measure to safeguard the long-term sustainability of the pension system simultaneously keep pension at an adequate level.
This be come in, measure at different stage in the life cycle (investment in childcare facilities, trainee support, Social Guarantee 2021, digital pension overview).
Furthermore, the comprehensive investment and reform in the area of digital education (compo -) and far training in particular (skills alliance in ) create the condition for participation in the labour market and long- term safeguarding of employability, and strengthen the educational outcome and skill level of disad -vantaged groups.
Funding for a special programme to accelerate the research and development of urgently need vaccine against Covid-19 serve specifically to combat the pandemic.
The long-term resilience of the health -care system be support by strength-ening the digital and technical resource of the public health service and through the programme to future-proof hospital (Zukunftsprogramm Krankenhäuser) ().
2 When calculate bu balance a part of European bu surveillance, subsidy from the RRF and the corresponding expenditure be enter in such a that they have a neutral impact on balances, a define in the national accounts.
Funds from the RRF be thus record -ed for statistical purpose in the same a regular EU subsidy to Member States.
At the time the measure be record on the expense side, a corresponding transaction be enter on the revenue side, ensure that, irrespective of the actual time that the EU subsidy be disbursed, RRF measure be record in a that have a Finally, the country-specific recommen -dations call on Germany to combat the economic consequence of the pandemic effectively and to support the economy and promote it recovery, also ensure that debt remain manageable in the medium term.
German fiscal policy be strongly expan -sionary at the current time and therefore follo this recommendation.
The federal government™s economic stimulus programme thus also provide a significant expansionary fiscal stimulus for the Eurozone.
At the same time, the relevant requirement in the German debt brake rule ensure that any addi -tional debt take on in an emergency have a structural impact and exceed the upper limit for new borro must be reduce in the medium term.
From 2022 on , the deficit be expect to fall below the limit of 3 % of GDP once again and the deficit be further reduced, the aim of ensure that debt remain sustainable.
The medium- term bu objective (MTO) not exceed % of GDP be achieve again in 2024, accord to projection and the financial plan.
Ongoing low interest rates, recover economic gro and lo level of new borro help to reduce the debt ratio in the medium term to 68 ¾ % of GDP by 2024 (see table 1 and figure 2).
2A comprehensive overview of the focus of Germa -ny™s fiscal policy be provide in the reporting on the Stability Programme and in the Draft Bu Plan.
Linking the plan the European Semester 15German Recovery and Resilience Plan Info box: 2019 Country-Specific Recommendations 3.
In line the general escape clause, take all necessary measure to effectively address the pandemic, sustain the economy and support the ensuing recovery.
When economic condition allow, pursue fiscal policy aim at achieve prudent medium-term fiscal position and ensure debt sustainability, enhance invest -ment.
Mobilise adequate resource and strengthen the resilience of the health system, include by deploy ehealth services.
Front-load mature public investment project and promote private investment to foster the economic recovery.
Focus investment on the green and digital transition, in particular on sustainable transport, clean, efficient and integrated energy systems, digital infra -structure and skills, housing, education and research, and innovation.
Improve digital public service across all level and foster the digitalisation in small and medium-sized enterprises.
Reduce the regulatory and administrative burden for businesses.
While respect the medium-term bu objective, use fiscal and structural policy to achieve a sustain up trend in private and public investment, notably at regional and municipal level.
Focus investment- related economic policy on education; research and innovation; digitalisation and very-high-capacity broad band; sustainable transport a a energy net and affordable housing, take into account regional disparities.
Shift tax a from labour to source more supportive for inclusive and sustainable gro .
Strengthen competition in business service and regulate professions.
Reduce disincentives to more hours, include the high tax , in particular for low- and second earners.
Take measure to safeguard the long-term sustainability of the pension system, preserve adequacy.
Strengthen the condition that support high gro , respect the role of the social partners.
Improve educational outcome and skill level of disadvantage groups.
Linking the plan the European Semester Table 1: General government bu balance and debt Government bu As of: 2 December 2020 201920202021202220232024% of GDP Maastricht bu balance balance ½61 ¾¾0Debt level ½ 717068 ¾ Figure 2: Trend in the Maastricht debt-to-GDP ratio from 2008 to 2024 ( in % of GDP) Sources: until 2019: German Bundesbank; from 2020 on : Federal Ministry of Finance projection, last updated December 2020.
Description of investment measure and reform 17German Recovery and Resilience Plan Description of investment measure and reform In June 2020, the German government adopt an economic stimulus and future-oriented package an unprecedented total volume of over • 180 billion in the 2020 and 2021 bu alone.
This be the centrepiece of the federal govern -ment™s fiscal response to the Covid-19 crisis and be supplement by measure adopt before and after to deal the pandemic™s impact on health, society and the economy.
Along the traditional ﬁthree Tsﬂ of economic policy (ﬁtimelyﬂ, ﬁtemporaryﬂ, ﬁtargetedﬂ), the guiding principle also to take measure to strengthen potential gro in the long term and to facilitate the transition to a climate-neutral and digital future (ﬁtransformativeﬂ).
The measure enshrine in the GRRP systematically reflect the domestic effort of the economic stim -ulus package, the timing and scale of make Germany a pioneer in Europe.
The economic stimulus programme consist of three pillars: The first pillar Œ the economic stimulus and crisis management package Œ boost overall economic demand and make additional liquidity avail -able to companies.
The federal government be also offer business tax incentive in order to maintain investment activity, relieve the pressure on local authority a a key player in public investment activity, and be bring for - it o investments.
The second pillar in the programme be the future development package.
With this, the federal government be strengthen private and public investment at all level in order to drive for the modernisation of the German economy.
These additional investment measures, be also relate to effort to tackle the effect of the pandemic, but have a long time horizon, total around • 50 billion overall.
This spending modernise infrastructure and make it more efficient, thereby increase pro -ductivity.
Investment in (potentially disruptive) technology of the future be associate a longer-term planning and implementation per -spective and increase the potential level of economic development in the long run.
The third pillar underline Germany™s respon -sibilities at European and international level a the large economy in the EU.
It includes, for example, a Franco-German initiative that con -tributed to the realisation of Next Generation EU and be reflect in joint future projects.
Germany be also make fund available at inter -national level in order to step up international cooperation in combat the Covid-19 crisis.
18German Recovery and Resilience Plan Description of investment measure and reform In view of the significant overlap bet the goal of the economic stimulus programme and those of the European Recovery and Resilience Facility, the specific measure of the GRRP concentrate on the follo six focus areas: 1.
Strengthening of a pandemic- resilient healthcare system 6.
Modern administration and reduce barrier to investment In addition to the measure in the economic stimuluspackage, the federal government be under -lining the focus area of climate action and digitali -sation through further measure in the GRRP.
Three ﬁImportant Projects of Common European Interestﬂ (IPCEIs) in the area of hydrogen, microelec troni technology and processing be particularly mentioning.
These project can be trace back to the Franco-German technology dialogue and send a strong message about Franco-German cooperation a measure that be simultaneously part of the German and the French recovery and resilience plan (see info box).
They build on project such a the creation of a Franco-German research and innovation net (ﬁvirtual centreﬂ) for artificial intelligence and a Franco-German business and innovation park in the context of the future process Fessenheim, already agree in the ﬁFranco-German Agendaﬂ a specific priority project implement the Treaty of Aachen.
The IPCEIs be open to the participation of other EU Member States.
19German Recovery and Resilience Plan Info box: IPCEI Just a the initiative by Germany and France for the recovery instrument in May 2020, also to send out a signal about European cooperation it come to the use of fund from the Recovery and Resilience Facility.
This take place in key area of the digital and green trans formation: hydrogen, cloud computing and microelec -tronics/ communication technologies.
Three key project have be develop in these area in technology dialogue representative from business and the European Com -mission.
The specic aim of these project be to become a nexus for transformation and market adjustment that lead to structural reform and have an EU- impact.
We our project to create an integrated EU- market for hydrogen production, include cross-border transport infrastructure, lay the foundation for a European e cloud infrastructure, and free the EU from dependence on external provider for select microelectronic communication technologies.
We make use of the instrument of the IPCEI to imple -ment these projects.
The project be be initiate and promote by Germany and France; at the same time, a IPCEIs they be project that have originate in Europe and by denition be thus open to stakeholder from all EU Member States.
IPCEIs be also a tried-and-tested instrument of cooperation the European Commis -sion, particularly regard to EU state aid control.
Details of focus area for measure and component 21German Recovery and Resilience Plan Estimated cost of the plan Table 2: Estimated cost of the plan Focus area Component Total volume in • thousand, current price in % 1.
Data a the raw material of the future 2,824,.2.
Modern public administration and reduce barrier to investment .
Modern public administration 3,474, 29,319,382100Details of focus area for measure and component 22German Recovery and Resilience Plan Industrialisation have bring major gain in prosperity for Germany and many part of the .
Ho , the past t century of indus -trialisation base on the use of fossil energy sources.
The impact on the climate have become a serious threat to our environment and natural resources.
The late UN report sho that there be still a long to go until the United Nations™ Sustainable Development Goals for 2030 be achieved.
In order to achieve the Sustainable Development Goals and the Paris Agreement™s targets, the German government and the European Union be to achieve net-zero greenhouse gas emission by 2050.
This require major efforts, but also offer huge opportunities.
With regard to our energy supply in particular, complete decarbonisation be require even before 2050.
Germany have already initiate an energy transition at an early stage, extensive measure that cannot be present here in detail (.
2010 Energy Strategy, Climate Action Plan 2050, Climate Action Programme 2030, Rene Energy Sources Act (Erneuer -bare-Energien-Gesetz) and the Coal Phase-Out Act (Kohleausstiegsgesetz)).
The project in the Recovery and Resilience Plan support this strategic objective and can be break do into the follo components: decar-bonisation use rene hydrogen in particular, climate-friendly mobility and climate-friendly reno -vation and construction.
Decarbonisation use rene hydrogen in particular The National Hydrogen Strategy describe an impor-tant addition to the future energy supply in Germany.
It make a contribution to the decarbonisation of the economy and society.
Sustainable CO 2-free hydrogen that be produce use rene energy play an important part in achieve energy and climate target and in the decarbonisation of the economy and part of the transport sector.
It also offer significant opportunity in term of industrial, innovation and employment policy, include regard to the export of technology.
At the current time, ho , a market for green hydrogen do not exist either at the national or the European level, a the use of green hydrogen tech -nologies be currently even more expensive than use fossil hydrogen.
On top of this, green electricity from rene source be not yet available in sufficient quantities.
In addition, there be currently a lack of proven solution for the large-scale industrial imple -mentation of a green hydrogen economy, meaning that there be a significant need for further research and innovation.
The National Hydrogen Strategy lay the foundation for make Germany an international lead marketand lead provider for the development, manufacture and use of green hydrogen technologies.
To do this, Germany must lead the in manufacturing,infra -structure, research and development and techno - logicaldevelopment, a as regard to therapid expansion of rene energy source that be neces -sary for the production of green hydrogen.
It be clear that the development and use of green hydrogen technology require high investment in the beginning, the state must support govern -ment funding for investment and operate costs.
Focus area 1: Climate policy and energy transition Details of focus area for measure and component 23German Recovery and Resilience Plan The catalogue of measure in the National Hydrogen Strategy combine investment in the development of a hydrogen economy correspond initiative relate to the revision of regulatory law, particularly in the area of price regulation, and thus include both investment and a significant reform approach.
Based on our experience the first projects, particularly cross-border infrastructure project the scope of the IPCEI, to draw up recommendation for adjustment to the regulatory frame at a national level and for structure for the regulatory frame that be need at EU level.
The GRRP implement important component of the National Hydrogen Strategy.
Specific integrated project along the entire value- add chain be promote the scope of an IPCEI for hydrogen the aim of accel- erating the necessary market ramp-up.
There be a particular emphasis on a) build up large- scale electrolysis capacity for produce green hydrogen at location sufficient electricity from rene be available, b) the industrial use of green hydrogen a a decarbonisation option for large industrial facilities, c) the development of a European value-added chain for fuel cell system for vehicle drive systems, d) the development and production of light and heavy vehicles, buses, freight and passenger trains, car for use in vehicle fleets, air transport and ship trans -port hydrogen-based drives, e) the creation of refuel infrastructure, include for heavy good transport, and f) the development of various cross- border flagship project that form the core of a European hydrogen net .
In addition, it be essential to create infrastructure to transport hydrogen.
It need to be examine to extent the exist gas net infrastructure can be use to transport hydrogen.
The addition of hydrogen to exist natural gas net currently in use be not viable for reason of energy efficiency.
As a Franco-German project, the project contribute to the sovereignty approach to the development of a European value-added chain for key technology and of infrastructure, the aim of establish a European market for green hydrogen.
A launch event in conjunction other Member States be plan for December 2020, and the beginning of the German expression-of-interest procedure for the IPCEI for hydrogen be schedule for December2020/ January 2021.
Details of focus area for measure and component Table 3: Decarbonisation solution use rene hydrogen in particular Title of measure Volume in • thousandClimateDigitalReform CSR EU agshipNational Hydrogen Strat -egy: Flagship project for research and innovation in the context of the National Hydrogen Strategy 700,000Investments in the ecological transition, especially clean, efficient energy sys -tems on the basis of rene energy source 1.
Po up National Hydrogen Strategy: Hydrogen project the frame of IPCEIs (Germany-France) 1,500,000Investments in the ecological tran -sition, especially clean, efficient and integrated energy system on the basis of renew-able energy sources, orient to climate target 1.
Po up Project-related research (climate protection research) 60,000Investments in the ecological tran -sition, especially clean, efficient and integrated energy systems; research and innov-ation on the basis of rene energy source 1.
Po up National Hydrogen Strategy: Funding programme for decarbonisation in industry 449,288Investments in the ecological transition, especially clean, efficient and integrated energy system on the basis of re -new-able energy source 1.
Po up National Hydrogen Strategy: Pilot scheme for climate action contract base on the principle of Carbon Contracts for Difference 550,000Investments in the ecological transition, especially clean, efficient and integrated energy system on the basis of re -new-able energy source 1.
Po up 24German Recovery and Resilience Plan The project be link to the country-specific recom -mendations in that it contribute to investment in the ecological transition, research and innovation, the decarbonisation of industry and transport, and clean, efficient and integrated energy systems.
It also help to strengthen the competitiveness of the European economy and to preserve it technological leadership and security of supply.
The funding programme ﬁdecarbonisation in industryﬂ plans, regard to energy-intensive industry process-related emissions, to support a) research and development, b) test in test and pilot facilities, and c) investment in facility for the industrial-scale application and implementation of measures, provide that they be suitable for bring about the most substantial and lasting reduction possible in greenhouse gas emissions.
In this , industry can help to achieve net-zero greenhouse gas emission by 2050.
As an expensive and scarce commodity, green hydrogen be use it have the big long-term impact in term of climate action and there be no more efficient technical option for decarbonisation.
The focus be on the use of green hydrogen in industry.
As as invest -ment costs, the high operating cost require for innovative climate action technology constitute a challenge.
The German government therefore launch a pilot scheme for climate action contract base on the approach of Carbon Contracts for Differences (CCfDs).
This pilot scheme be gear to fund for additional operating cost (OPEX) due to climate and environmental action and thus be a useful supplement to the programme for funding investment costs.
In addition, further effort be require in the area of research and development, in order to make available the technology and the associated system kno that be necessary to implement the goal of the National Hydrogen Strategy.
Corresponding flagship project for research and innovation be launch to this fund that be use specifically for project-related research support the development of climate- friendly production process and combination of process in basic industries, contribute directly to the avoidance of greenhouse gases.
The emphasis be on the direct avoidance of process-related CO 2 emission by develop new production processes, particularly in the context of an initially low level of technological maturity.
The support measure be design to be cross-sectoral and be target primarily at company in the area of non-ferrous metals, chemical and mineral (.
The research approach consist of, for example, use hydrogen in energy-intensive process (metal production, glass production) or in the partial substitution of cement in the production of concrete by develop new input materials, allow process-related CO 2 emission in the production of cement to be at least partially avoided.
A specific approach plan to transform the production of soda, a mass-produced product, from a source of CO 2 into a carbon sink by mean of a new production process.
The need for reform describe above applies not only to basic industries, but also to small and medium- sized enterprise (SMEs) that generate a large propor -tion of Germany™s economic output.
On the one hand, they must find innovative solution to ensure that their o production process be climate-efficient and conserve resources.
On the other, they be often the driver of innovation in their sector a supplier or service providers.
The fund use enable SMEs to establish themselves sustainable solution or to secure and expand their position and competitiveness on global markets.
The implementa -tion of these ob jectives be support by a support measure that take into account SMEs™ concern and need in the area of resource efficiency and climate action.
This measure be design to be cross-sectoral and be not restrict to any particular aspect.
Hence it be available to both the manufacturing and the service sectors.
Accordingly, the development of new environ mentally friendly product and process be supported, a innovation in the area of soft - and services.
Other partner in the transformation of the energy system include local authority and urban regions.
Many metropolitan area be therefore look for solution for a sustainable future in the context of adapt to climate change.
The deployed fund enable city to promote kno creation in rela -tion to concrete option for action and processes, as a to increase the effectiveness of measure to adapt to climate of focus area for measure and component 25German Recovery and Resilience Plan Climate-friendly mobility The second component in the area of climate action relate to the transition to climate-friendly mobility.
It take into account the country-specific recommendation on investment in the ecological transition, particularly sustainable transport, and help implement the EU flagship initiative Recharge and refuel.
Subsidies for the construction of filling and charging infrastructure be intend to support the market ramp-up of battery- and hydrogen-based electric vehicles.
This require a comprehensive net of charge infrastructure in line demand.
While the available charging infrastructure be a key factor in the acceptance of emissions-free vehicles, the development of electric mobility and innovation premium program directly boost demand for these type of passenger car and close exist gap in the area of research and development by mean of targeted support.
This be complement by a reform of vehicle tax in a tax exemption for purely electric vehicle and a tax reduction for low-emissions passenger car be introduced.
Other measure this component aim to promote purchase of bus alternative drive and to promote alternative drive in rail transport, and also relate to the replacement of the heavy commercial vehicle fleet.
Details of focus area for measure and component Table 4: Climate-friendly mobility Title of measure Volume in • thousandClimateDigitalReform CSR EU agshipDevelopment of electric mobility in the ecological transition, particularly sustain -able transport3.
Recharge andrefuel National Hydrogen Strategy: Funding for the vehicle and supplier industry for hydrogen and fuel cell application in transport, a Techno -logy and Innovation Centre for Fuel Cell Technology and the interna -tional harmonisation of standard for mobility application in the ecological transition, particularly transport 3.
Recharge andrefuel Subsidies for the construction of filling and charge infrastructure .000Investment in the ecological transition, particularly sustain -able transport3.
Recharge andrefuel Promotion of purchase of bus alternative drive system .000Investment in the ecological transition, particularly sustain -able transport3.
Recharge andrefuel National Hydrogen Strategy: Subsidies to fund alternative drive system in rail in the ecological transition, particularly sustain -able transport3.
Recharge andrefuel Fleet rene programme .000Investment in the ecological transition, particularly sustain -able transport3.
Recharge andrefuel Innovation premium to fund the replacement of vehicle fleet .000Investment in the ecological transition, particularly sustain -able transport3.
Recharge andrefuel Extension of first registration period for the granting of ten-year tax exemption for purely electric vehicle in the area of sustainable transport3.
Recharge andrefuel Tax reduction for passenger car particularly low emission in the area of sustainable transport3.
Recharge andrefuel 26German Recovery and Resilience Plan In addition to charge infrastructure and a a boost demand for vehicle alternative drives, the production side also be strengthened.
As part of the National Hydrogen Strategy, support be provided, a new holistic approach, for a competitive supply industry for hydrogen and fuel cell technology for heavy good vehicles.
In particular, the aim be to enable production of fuel cell stack and near-series component and vehicle testing in Germany.
The new Hydrogen Technology and Innova -tion Centre (Technologie- und Innovationszentrum Wasserstofftechnologie) that be to be establish focus on the value-added chain of hydrogen and fuel cell technology for mobility applications, the aim of ensure the future viability of the German/ European industry.
The technical focus of the centre be on fuel cell systems.
In addition, the infra -structural integration fill station technology and the corresponding interface vehicle and fill system also be addressed.
The main motivation for establish a Hydrogen Technology and Innovation Centre be the need for a development, certification and stand ardisation facility, , due to the early market phase and the high cost involved, cannot be realise support from the public sector.
The centre provide in particular small and medium-sized enterprise and start-ups a development en viron ment, enable them to position themselves to compete internationally.
The Hydrogen Technology and Innovation Centre should also provide far added value in term of international cooperation for set standard and correspond certification process through prenormative .
The German government have not previously pursue a com parable approach to support company in the field of hydrogen fuel cell systems.
Climate-friendly renovation and construction This component be target at the climate objective a focus on the EU flagship Renovate.
Within the scope of the local authority living lab for the energy transition, local authority use ambitious, energy-optimised construction project a blueprint for a broad building typology.
Innovative construction project aim to strengthen the part play by local authority a a role model in climate action and the energy transition, accelerate the rapid transfer of innovation to society and promote broad acceptance.
The research and demonstration project aim to achieve a measurable reduction in the environ -mental impact and be use in the testing and dissemination of scientific technological approach in order to test and demonstrate their practicability.
The main target group be large-scale implementa -tion projects, the involvement of SMEs in particular be promoted.
These reform be a key element of the EU flagship Renovate.
With the Federal Funding for Energy-Efficient Buildings, the federal government be reorganise it funding for energy efficiency in building in connec -tion the implementation of the Climate Action Programme 2030 and the funding strategy ﬁEnergy Efficiency and Heat from Rene Energiesﬂ (ﬁEner -gieeffizienz und Wärme aus Erneuerbaren Energienﬂ).
The aim be to encourage investment that improve energy efficiency and increase the share of rene energy in the end energy consumption of buildings.
Funding be provide for the construction and renovation of residential building at ﬁefficiency houseﬂ level, energy need and CO2 emission be below the legal requirements.
In particular, funding be provide for innovative energy-related renovation or new building belong to public companies.
Details of focus area for measure and component 27German Recovery and Resilience Plan Each type of funding be available in the form of both subsidy and loans.
Key element include: the introduction of ﬁEEﬂ class (.
ﬁefficiency house 55EEﬂ) for the use of rene energies; high rate of funding for efficiency house level EH 40 a a parti -cularly ambitious project; promotion of digitalisation measure to optimise consumption (.
The support scheme for the ne introduce sustainability class (ﬁNHﬂ classes) be base on demonstrate certification in the form of the Federal Ministry of the Interior™s ﬁSustainable Buildingﬂ certi -fication mark, be currently be developed.
New building the ﬁSustainable Buildingﬂ certi -fication mark receive increase funding a ﬁNHﬂ class (.
The NH class do not only take into account the operational phase of buildings; instead, apply the life cycle approach to sustainable building, the focus be also on be kno a ﬁgreyﬂ emissions, .
greenhouse gas emis -sions from the production phase include upstream supply chains.
The funding guideline play a key part in reduce greenhouse gas emission from building to 70 million tonne of CO2 equivalent by 2030 and thus in achieve both national and European energy and climate target by 2030.
The forestry and timber industry be face major structural challenges.
Storms and drought that have be intensify by climate change and associate bark beetle infestation have cause massive damage to forest across Germany.
The future viability of the forestry and timber sector be heavily dependent on the development of domestic sale market for timber.
Climate-friendly timber construction play a key role here.
The timber construction industry be mainly structure around small and medium-sized enterprises.
Given the rapid technological change take place, lead to application in the area of digitalisation, robotics and artificial intelligence, the accelerated introduction and dissemination of modern technology be necessary in order to keep company competitive and ensure adequate economic gro and high level of employment.
Factors such a material and energy efficiency and the integration of environmental and life cycle assess -ment data into business process be become increasingly relevant.
At the same time, rise demand and the need for complex construction project present new challenge for companies: a a technological changes, they require an adjustment of structure and capacity in the traditional timber construction sector.
These necessary adjustment process can be support by promote advisory service the aim of increase the use of timber a a building material and by establish and expand innovation cluster in the timber construc -tion sector.
They can also be expect to have positive steer effect regard to the future challenge of digitalisation, resource efficiency and climate action.
Table 5: Climate-friendly renovation and construction Title of measure Volume in • thousandClimateDigitalReform CSR EU agshipDevelopment of climate-friendly timber construction 70,000Investment in the ecological transition, particularly housing construction 2.
Renovate Local authority living lab for the energy transition 57,000Investment in the ecological transition, particularly housing construction 2.
Renovate CO2 building renovation: federal funding for energy-efficient building 2,500,000Investment in the ecological transition, particularly housing construction 2.
Renovate Details of focus area for measure and component 28German Recovery and Resilience Plan Focus area 2: Digitalisation of theeconomy and infrastructure Technological change be advance relentlessly.
In particular, the digitalisation of everyday life and the economy be change our society and economy at a rapid pace Œ and not just in term of communications.
The focus be on technological transformation through digitalisation and the asso -ciated development of efficient infrastructure.
Data a the raw material of the future The first component in this focus area be dedicate to the issue of data a the raw material of the future.
It address the European flagship goal Connect, Modernise and Scale- data policy for Germanyﬂ reform packageIf nothing else, the pandemic have highlight the importance of the availability and use of relevant, up-to-date data in order to make decision quickly on the basis of facts.
The federal government to redefine Germany™s data policy an ambitious data strategy that span different policy areas.
The strategy aim to promote data-driven innovation and increase the provision and responsible use of data.
The federal government™s initiative be also an integrative component of a European vision for the data age.
The of measure list below be implement a of 2021.
Data infrastructure for high-performance com -puting (HPC): To create efficient HPC infrastructure in Europe, the exist infrastructure need to be well connect and expanded.
The federal govern -ment be develop an ﬁOverall strategy on compute infrastructureﬂ to this end and be support in this European HPC initiative and development projects.
Expansion activity at the various level be interlink and be support by research into the development of hard and soft for future computer system and applications.
Along the expansion of infrastructure, the strategy aim to develop specific industrial use case in cooperation businesses, and to promote the necessary skill in companies.
Data custodians: For the pooling and joint use of specific data, it may be useful to have these service provide by a ﬁdata custodianﬂ, ensure that the data contribute by various institution (.
To promote a variety of data custodian models, the federal govern -ment have launch an ideas contest and be set up a funding programme for the development and testing of innovative data custodians.
Support be provide for practical projects, may be inter -disciplinary, that contribute to the concrete design of data custodian model and thereby address the broad possible range of issues.
Anonymisation and depersonalisation of data: To promote technical data protection, the federal govern -ment set up a research net for anonymisa -tion.
As a conduct research, this net boost the transfer of research by support the public administration and business issue relate to the of data, thus create incentive to share data.
By pool skill in a net and establish a specific research profile, the federal government strengthen research in this area on a lasting basis and seek to achieve a prominent international position.
Data skill in science: The federal government enhance scientists™ skill in the handling of data.
As part of this, it be set up a National Research Data Infrastructure (NFDI).
Institutions involve in the NFDI receive support the development of e-learning module that can be use in the training of specialist scientists.
After that, model data science laboratory be set up at site belong to the Details of focus area for measure and component 29German Recovery and Resilience Plan NFDI and act a centre of excellence for data sciences.
In addition, the federal government launch a doctoral programme to develop skill in the field of data science and a service that enable funding to be provide for research project base on the use of exist research data sets.
Data skill in society: The federal government provide funding for the creation of a ﬁtoolboxﬂ to in crease data skill in various area of application, .
This toolbox be develop centrally and then make freely available.
This service be of particular interest to small and medium-sized enterprises, a Œ unlike large company Œ they do not have enough resource of their o to invest in the development of their o data skills.
The federal government be also develop specific service for student (data literacy courses) and be push for the responsible use and provision of data, and for a shift to a strong open data culture.
Intensification of the sharing of data be accompany by more efficient control of data protection and cybersecurity.
IPCEI microelectronics and communication technology Net and communication (5G, 6G, OpenRAN) in future be dominate even more strongly than today by microelectronic components.
This include component such a processor and microchip a a component for control and data processing, sending and receiving component for fix data transmission (expansion of fibre-optic broadband) or data transmission (mobile phone reception), and compo -nents for self-diagnosis, defence against attack or artificial intelligence (AI) and HPC hard .
The German and European economy therefore need an efficient and broad-based microelectronics sector local patents, development and production.
During the Franco-German technology dialogue the European Commission, the political to realise an IPCEI for microelectronics and communication technology become clear.
As a strengthen those area of microelectronics in Europe be in a good position (.
po electronics, sensors), the IPCEI above all aim to catch up in those field Europe have so far be dependent on import from other countries.
The intention be to support the development of future innovative net / micro-electronic technologies, base on small structure and a combination of functionality and materials, in Europe up to market maturity, in order to put Europe in a good position in future respect to the consequence of dependence on global supply chain in the area of communications.
IPCEI cloud and data process The IPCEI look into during the Franco-German technology dialogue on 13 October 2020 a a measure to increase Europe™s digital sovereignty.
The aim be to create the basis for a sovereign, highly scalable e cloud infrastructure in Europe.
The infrastructure build on highly innovative, real-time-capable struc -tures distribute across Europe and be operate in a that be highly efficient and save energy.
This require extensive R&D activities, include the development and definition of open source technolo -gies.
The programme also encompass investment in a first industrial application.
The infrastructure build on the rule and standard compile by GAIA-X.
Its capability be demonstrate the implementa -tion of one or more highly complex use cases.
Spain and Italy have already agree to participate in this IPCEI.
Table 6: Data a the raw material of the future Title of measure Volume in • thousandClimateDigitalReform CSR EU agshipInnovative data policy for Germany 574,400Investment in the digital transition, particularly digital infrastructure 5.
Modernise IPCEI microelectronics and communication tech -nologies (Germany-France) 1,500,000Investment in the digital transition, particularly digital infrastructure, research and innovation 4.
Connect IPCEI cloud and data pro -cessing (Germany-France) 750,000Investment in the digital transition, particularly digital infrastructure, research and innovation 6.
Scale-up Details of focus area for measure and component 30German Recovery and Resilience Plan Digitalisation of the economy This component be dedicate to the digitalisation of individual economic sectors.
It contribute to the EU flagships Scale-up and Reskill and upskill.
The vehicle industry must deal t major chal -len ge simultaneously.
On the one hand, it must play a significant part in achieve climate targets.
This require a fundamental shift to alternative drive systems, the use of traditional combustion engine decline.
On the other hand, the industry be be affect by digitalisation on t levels.
Vehi-cles themselves be become increasingly digital, from entertainment system to automated drive on road and rail.
Ho , production must also become increasingly digital, drive by rise demand for flexibilisation and international cost pressure.
Only the introduction of Industry make the sector truly future-proof.
The qualification and further training of exist employee also be of crucial importance for the success of the transformation.
The programme for vehicle supplier industry therefore aim to strengthen and above all to modernise vehicle manufacturer (including the rail industry) and the supplier industry in three areas.
In module (a), investment in new technologies, process and facility be promoted.
The focus be on environmental investment to ensure that production facility be material- and energy-efficient and on digitali of Industry across the board.
Module (b) support research and development for innovation that be relevant to the transformation.
Issues cover include automate and connect driving, alternative drive technologies, light energy-optimised design and new materials, new business model and digitalecosystems throughout the entire supply chain.
Module (c) promote new regional innovation clusters, particularly in the supplier industry, also supplement the training initiative.
The digitalisation and net in innovation clus -ters not only give rise to new business models, but also new form of cooperation, particularly in connection more flexible production facilities.
As a reform, the federal programme ﬁDevelopment of skill alliancesﬂ aim to increase the participation of SMEs in skill training, thereby enhance future- proof (especially digital) skill and support regional business and innovation net .
In view of the Covid-19 pandemic and the result accelerated structural change, particularly in the context of the restructuring of the automotive sector (see compo -), significant action be required.
The focus Table 7: Digitalisation of the economy Title of measure Volume in • tClimateDigitalReform CSR EU agshipInvestment programme for vehicle .500Investments in alternative drive sys -tems, digitalisation and automation, particularly research and innovation, education, digital skill 6.
Scale-up Federal programme ﬁDevelop -ment of skill alliancesﬂ in education, the digital transition, particularly digital skills, skill level of disadvantage groups, condition for high gro 7.
Reskill and upskillBundes Digitalisation and Technology Research Centre () in the digital transition, particularly research and innovation Promotion of digitalisation of the rail through replacement of conventional signal boxes/ fast-track programme to accel -erate the roll-out of ﬁDigital Rail Germanyﬂ in the digital transition, particularly sustainable transport; bring for public investment Details of focus area for measure and component 31German Recovery and Resilience Plan of funding be on the establishment and expansion of bind cooperation and net structure bet companies, educational institution and advisory service and all other major player across the training landscape.
The concrete task of this programme be to identify train needs, provide information and advice, and support the develop -ment of new train content, especially regard to digital and AI skills.
The programme™s orientation be sector-specific and regional, in order to implement individual and tailor-made solution for companies, or also cross-sector, to help ensure that employee employment profile be replace in the future can obtain qualification for other job profiles.
The federal programme be a key commitment in the National Skills Strategy (as the domestic pillar of the Skilled Labour Strategy (Fachkräftestrategie)).
It pursue the aim of reforming, systematising and strengthen a skill policy that support lifelong learning and focus on qualification and compe -tence development and the long-term safeguarding of employability.
It be also link to EU flagship 7: Reskill and upskill Œ the adaptation of education system to support digital skill and educational and vocational training for all ages.
The Bundes Digitalisation and Technology Research Centre () be a scientific centre support by the t Bundes university and be base at the Bundes University Munich (UniBw).
It be subject to the law on academic self-administ -ration and conduct university research.
By tap the innovation potential of the Bundes Univer -sities, the aim be to improve the national availability of digital and technological innovation for the public and private sector and further extend Germany™s digital sovereignty through innovative and interdis -ciplinary research in a secure environment.
The centre thus act a a driving force for academic research into digitalisation and technology by the Bundes and at the same time pave the for increase the national availability of digital and technological inno -vations for the public and private sector a a .
Investments in digital signalling technology be be bring for to this year in order to help the economy by secure job and support company in the rail sector.
Under the digit -ali sation programme involve the replacement of conventional signal programme to accelerate the roll-out of ﬁDigital Rail Germanyﬂ, the introduction of digitalisation in the rail sector be be accelerated.
In this context, exist signal box and level crossing protection system be replaced, old installation be replace by safety system of the late digital generation and com patibility subsequent ETCS expansion be enable through uniform system interfaces.
Details of focus area for measure and component 32German Recovery and Resilience Plan Education be of high importance for long-term potential gro and creation.
The Covid-19 crisis have revealed, not for the first time, that Germany be face considerable challenge in the field of digital literacy in particular.
Digitalisation of education The digital education initiative, aim to well exploit the opportunity and potential that digit -alisation offer individual and society, form the core of this component.
In this respect, this component be closely link to the component of digitalisation in the public administration.
The initiative create the necessary digital infrastructure, expand digital teaching, learning and communication facilities, and establish digital innovation in the education system, to strengthen teachers™ and pupils™ digital skill and create equal educational opportunity a view to improve social inclusion ().
Other - , there be a risk that reduce access to education could diminish young people™s skill development and hamper their future success on the labour market, particularly in the case of those from educationally disadvantage backgrounds.
With the gradual development of a national educa-tion platform, to create a space for all area of education in data be protect and quality be assured.
The platform provide guidance and comprehensive access to service on an individual basis, ensure informational self-determination.
Table 8: Digitalisation of education Title of measure Volume in • thousandClimateDigitalReform CSR EU agshipTeacher device 500,000Investment in the digital transition, particularly education and digital skills; condition for high gro 7.
Reskill and upskillEducation platform (in conjunction the digital teaching space) 630,000Investment in the digital transition, particularly education and digital skills; condition for high gro 7.
Reskill and upskillEducational centre of excellence 205,000Investment in the digital transition, particularly education and digital skills; condition for high gro 7.
Reskill and upskillModernisation of the Bundes ™s educational and training facility 100,000Investment in the digital transition, particularly education and digital skills; condition for high gro 7.
Reskill and upskillFocus area 3: Digitalisation ofeducation Details of focus area for measure and component 33German Recovery and Resilience Plan In-service teacher training in the area of digital literacy be the key to promote digital and digitally support teaching.
The joint initiative of the federal government and the Länder for the creation of centre of excellence for digital and digitally support teach (ﬁDigital in-service teacher trainingﬂ) aim to strengthen digital teaching and learning.
Among other points, well interlinking of the activity of universities, non-university research institution and institution for in-service teacher training be planned.
A key issue paper on ﬁDigital in-service teacher trainingﬂ be agree bet the federal government and the Länder by early January 2021.
The first invitation to tender be issue in 2021.
The special equipment programme for digital device (ﬁSonderausstattungsprogramm für digi -tale En ) for teacher support the Länder the expansion of digital teaching, learning and communication facility in schools.
The provision of mobile device be intend to support teacher the preparation and follow-up of lesson and the implementation of digital teaching formats, irre -spective of teach take place in school or a distance learning.
The applicable administrative agreement bet the federal government and the Länder enter into force by the end of 2020.
The special equipment programme for digital device for teacher be complement by a special equipment programme for pupil in need and a programme to support IT administrator in the amount of • 500 million respectively in federal funding and at least • 50 million in additional Länder funding in each case; the agreement bet the federal government and the Länder be already in force in the case of the t support programmes.
The modernisation of the Bundes ™s educa -tional and train facility a a component of the Federal Ministry of Defence™s resilience programme be aim in particular at the digitalisation of educa -tional establishment and should be see in the over arch context of the federal government™s ﬁShaping Digit alisationﬂ implementation strategy.
The focus be on measure relate to the virtuali sa-tion of learn enviro nments and digital learning content, smart digital training and the smart campus, the develop ment of connect operation at educational establishment and the strength -ening of train net .
Details of focus area for measure and component 34German Recovery and Resilience Plan Focus area 4: Strengthening ofsocial inclusion An effective community be the hallmark of a resilient economy and society.
In addition, many social group need additional support especially during the Covid-19 pandemic.
For this reason, one focus of the GRRP be strengthen social resilience measure for labour market participa -tion and for appropriate and pensions.
Strengthening of social inclusion The reform in this component aim to improve condition for participation in the labour market, to promote gro in line produc tivity gains, and to ensure that the pension system be sustain -able simultaneously safeguard adequate pensions.
As a result, the component enhance social inclusion and contributes to three flagship initiatives: Renovate, Modernise and Reskill and upskill.
With the investment programme ﬁChildcare finan -cingﬂ 2020Œ2021, the federal government provide grant to Länder and local authority for investment in day-care facility and day care for child from birth to school entry.
Investments be make in new buildings, extensions, conversions, refurbish -ments, renovation and equipment; this measure therefore also relate to the EU flagship Renovate.
Investments that be use to create or provide equipment for additional childcare place be promoted.
This investment measure therefore also take into account the country-specific recommend -ations on investment in education.
Being able to attend a day-care centre particularly benefit socially disadvantage child and strengthen their skill levels.
The availability of childcare facility be essential in order to create the condition to enable parents, especially single mothers, to participate in the labour market increase their hours.
This not only boost their income, but also secure a pension income for this demographic group in the long term, thereby help to ensure that the pension system be sustainable by increase overall participation in the labour market.
Finally, this measure also aim to ensure great gender equality in society.
The Covid-19 pandemic be present the social se cu-rity system challenges, both on the revenue and on the expenditure sides.
To prevent this from lead to a rise in non- labour costs, social se curity contribution be stabilise at a maximum of 40 % in the Social Guarantee 2021.
This stabilisation avoid additional burdens, in particular for low and medium incomes, and prevent disincentive to more hours.
The measure ﬁSecuring training placesﬂ provide financial support for SMEs that take on trainee and that maintain their current level of training, create additional training places, avoid short-time (Kurzarbeit) for trainees, or take on trainee from company that have become insolvent.
Trainees temporarily cannot continue their training at the company get the opportunity to receive transitional funded in-house collaborative training (Verbundausbildung) or contract training (Auftrags -ausbildung).
This measure help to prevent the risk of a ﬁcoronavirus generationﬂ on the labour market and directly address EU flagship 7, R eskill and upskill, promotes high-quality employ -ment opportunity and adequate number of trainee pos-itions for young people enter the labour market, and strengthen vocational training.
The measure represent a reform in the area of education and labour market policy that help to cushion the social and economic effect of the pandemic, promote the right condition for high gro and secure a supply of skilled .
Details of focus area for measure and component 35German Recovery and Resilience Plan The digital pension overview be intend to enable citizen to obtain information about their individual pension provision from all three pillar (statutory, company and private pensions) and to identify any action they need to take.
Everything should be visible at a glance and digitally accessible via a portal, individual information on the achieve and achievable pension entitlement be compile from the status report of pension institution in a clear and user-friendly manner, supplement by a general overview.
In order to help citizen plan their pensions, it be very useful for entitlement to be present in a transparent fashion, not least so that citizen can make rational decision about their employment and about make additional provision if necessary.
This can strengthen trust in a functioning community and a pension system that meet demand, and ultimately it also help to ensure that the system be sustainable.
Finally, it should be emphasise that the measure list here represent only a small selection of the federal government™s comprehensive measure re lating to social and labour market policy.
In ac cord -ance the current ministry draft of the Second Management Positions Act (Z Führungs -positionen-Gesetz), the management board of a list company that be subject to equal co-determination must in future include at least one if it have more than three members.
In the case of company the Federation have a majority holding, the management body already be require to have at least one if it consist of more than t persons.
In addition, the 30 % minimum quota for and men on supervisory board of listed company that be subject to equal co-determination, have be mandatory since 2015, also be extend to company the Federation have a majority holding.
Table 9: Strengthening of social inclusion Title of measure Volume in • thousandClimateDigitalReform CSR EU agshipSpecial fund ﬁChild day-care expansionﬂ Œ Investment programme ﬁChildcare- financingﬂ 500,000Investment in education, skill level of disadvantage groups, reduce disincentive to more hours; indirectly: long-term sustainability of the pension system2.
Renovate Social Guarantee 2021Avoiding burden on the labour factor, reduce disincentive to more hour Trainee support 850,000Educational outcome of dis -advantaged groups; condition for high gro 7.
Reskill and upskillDigital pension overview 34,300Long-term sustainability of the pension system, digital adminis -trative service 5.
Modernise Details of focus area for measure and component 36German Recovery and Resilience Plan Companies and employee can continue to count on the short-time benefit from the Federal Employment Agency during the Covid-19 crisis, after the period of entitlement to this benefit, and measure to facilitate access to it that apply during the crisis, largely extend until the end of 2021.
These arrangement aim to ensure long- term planning certainty and to provide a bri to 2022.
This also include the fact that the Federal Employment Agency, for the purpose of provide relief to employers, completely reimburse the social security contribution must be bear by employer alone employee be receive the short-time benefit until 30 June 2021.
For company that have introduce short-time by that point, the Federal Employment Agency thereafter reimburse half of the contribution until 31 December 2021 at a flat rate.
The federal government support the Federal Employment Agency interest-free loans.
In 2021, the federal government expect to support the Federal Employment Agency a loan and a federal subsidy (• billion).
These measure safeguard the Federal Employ -ment Agency™s ability to function and make payment in 2020 and 2021.
In this , it be ensure that the Federal Employment Agency, a a key stakeholder, can mitigate the impact of the crisis on the labour market and at the same time support structural bonus for family children, provide parent a one-off payment of • 300 per child, be a measure intend to complement support for the income base.
The tax credit for single parent also more than double.
Fast and rather un-bureau -cratic assistance to prevent hardship that threaten people™s very existence should also be mention in this context.
To this end, the condition for access to basic income support significantly relax on a temporary basis: for a period of six months, means- testing be generally suspend and accommodation cost be recognise an appropriateness order to have social resilience and an effective community, the basis for taxation must also remain stable and sustainable.
Tax avoidance strategy must therefore be prevent through international agree -ments.
This be the only to ensure that the state remain efficient and that the tax and social contribution ratio can be stabilise at a sustainable level.
Details of focus area for measure and component 37German Recovery and Resilience Plan Focus area 5: Strengthening ofapandemic- resilient healthcaresystem Although Germany have so far prove good than average at cushion the effect of the pandemic on the healthcare sector, it have become clear that action be need in area of the public health service that be relevant to the pandemic and regard to digitalisation in the healthcare system.
In particular, the faster that the mean to directly fight the pandemic become available, the sooner social and economic activity can return to .1 Strengthening of a pandemic-resilient healthcare system This component follo the country-specific recom -mendation to effectively address the pandemic and strengthen the resilience of the health system, in cluding by deploy e-Health services, and con - tribute to the EU flagship Modernise.
The support for the accelerate research and develop -ment of urgently need vaccine against Covid-19 be aim at shorten the duration of the pandemic.
In particular, project funding for the accelerated development of vaccine be use to support the implementation of clinical trial in Germany and an increase in manufacture capacity.
The public health service Œ not least a view to the current Covid-19 pandemic Œ receive support digital expansion through the use of electronic services, particularly in the area of infection control.
This improve the long-term resilience of the public health service a an important pillar of the healthcare system in Germany.
The rapid expansion of digitalisation in local health authority could be use to structure process and report channel more efficiently.
Improved and target use of digital technology and the boosting of human and tech -nical resource help to curb further increase in the number of infection over the course of the pandemic.
Table 10: Strengthening of a pandemic-resilient healthcare system Title of measure Volume in • thousandClimateDigitalReform CSR EU agshipStrengthening the digital and technical resource of the public health service 813,900Resilience of the healthcare system, electronic health service 5.
Modernise Programme to future-proof hospitals3,000,000Resilience of the healthcare system, electronic health service 5.
Modernise Special programme for acceleration of research and development of urgently need vaccine against Covid-19 750,000Combat the pandemic effec -tively, investment in research and innovation Details of focus area for measure and component 38German Recovery and Resilience Plan The Pact for the Public Health Service (Pakt für den öffentlichen Gesundheitsdienst) include an increase in staff level and the enhancement of the public health service™s technical resources.
A key component of the pact be the full deployment and expansion of the German Electronic Reporting and Information System for Infection Control (DEMIS).
DEMIS be make available to all health authority by the end of 2022.
A crucial aim be to ensure that information system be consistently interoperable across all level and to develop standardised system and tool and make them available.
The programme to future-proof hospital aim to fund the necessary investment in modern emer -gency capacity and good digital infrastructure and to strengthen investment in development and regional care structures.
A total of • 3 billion from the federal bu be make available for this purpose.
Co- financing by the Länder and the body responsible for operate the hospital in the amount of • billion be planned.
Details of focus area for measure and component 39German Recovery and Resilience Plan It not be possible to implement reform an efficient public administration that be capable of effective action and simultaneously reduces administrative barrier to for -looking investments.
The Covid-19 crisis have highlighted, not for the first time, that there be considerable catching- up to do in this area.
Effective regulation that encourage innovation be also key to ensure that reform be implement as smoothly a possible.
Modern public administration Increased digitalisation of the public administration and an expansion of e-government service can improve the productivity of the public sector and stimulate demand for digital services.
Improving digital public service across all level be therefore also an important country-specific recommendation for Germany.
The modernisation of digital public service and identification service be also an aim of the Modernise flagship, this component be dedicate to.
A key current focus area for action involve enable identity to be establish on the Web a - sistance from the major platform and ensure that citizen can be provide forgery-proof digital verification in future.
This require an open identity ecosystem that be not subject to approval and that allo secure issuing, transfer and storage and self- determine for and use of verification.
The European identity ecosystem Œ an open iden -tity infrastructure that be not subject to approval Œ be intend to enable identity to be establish on the Web assistance from the major platform and to provide citizen forgery-proof digital verification in future.
The identity ecosystem do not compromise the sovereignty of nation state regard to the issuing of (identification) documents, nor do it attempt to unify exist standards.
Rather, the aim be to provide a digital identity on share infrastructure at the same time a issue analogue documents.
The ecosystem be open to all kind of applications, include economic applications, and also be design to enable the exchange of proof of identity of company and things.
Table 11: Modern public administration Title of measure Volume in • thousandClimateDigitalReform CSR EU agshipEuropean identity ecosystem 200,000Investment in the digital transition, digital administrative service 5.
Modernise Digitalisation of administration Œ implementation of the Online Access Act 3,000,000Digital administrative service 5.
Modernise Digitalisation of administration Œ implementation of the mod -ernisation of register (Register Modernisation Act (Registermo -dernisierungsgesetz), RegMoG) 275,000Digital administrative service 5.
Modernise Focus area 6: Modern public administration and reduce barrier to investment Details of focus area for measure and component 40German Recovery and Resilience Plan The Online Access Act promote the creation of a nation digital administrative service in Germany by 2022.
In particular, the aim be to digitalise 575 ad ministrative service in a that be user-friendly and legally sound.
As many local authority a possible be connect to the online services, have be develop and implement in one place base on the ﬁone for allﬂ model.
The user-friendliness of the digital service be the guiding principle.
The digital-isation programme, include platform system and digital basic also contain a specific federal component.
This be closely link to the implementation of the modernisation of registers.
A user-friendly digital administrative service require reliable, interlinked register data, for example through the introduction of the tax identification number a a cross-register identification number.
The register be manage on a decentralised basis in Germany, .
Often they be not link to each other in a that allow exist data to be use for other administrative procedures.
To ensure that this be possible in future, the quality of the German register be improve and they be link to each other nation through a cross-register identification management system and an authority and data communication system that be relevant to the implementation of the Online Access Act and the Europe- once-only principle.
Reducing barrier to investment Investment Œ both public and private Œ be a decisive factor for future economic gro , and in some case involve commit financial resource for a long period of time.
For this reason, it be necessary to enable a for -looking investment planning at an early stage a many investment project only have their intend impact at a late stage.
Targeted reform be intend to facilitate and accelerate the disbursement of public funding that have be make available, support both public and private invest -ment activity in a meaningful .
In 2009 Germany have set up the institution Partner -schaft Deutschland (PD), aim at provide local authority in particular targeted assistance in planning and implement investment project a a administrative modernisation projects.
Within the context of a government-funded research project call ﬁInvestment consulting for life cycle and out come-based procurementﬂ, PD be provide a large number of public institution target advice on how to plan, design and implement investment pro -jects.
As part of this research project, PD have identify key objective for the ongoing assistance it offers.
These objective include the follo : (a) provide expertise in the early stage of plan project and construction project to facilitate the effec -tive preparation of investments, (b) expediting and streamline planning and construction procedures, (c) support investment decision through the use of models, templates, process structures, training and other practical guides, and (d) capacity-building in the public administration, include a special focus on streamlined decision-making channel bet the level and management.
PD™s approach Œ to provide targeted, specialised assist -ance to public official be directly responsible for implement investment project Œ be capable of be expand to additional areas.
For example, it could be assess the PD™s approach be suit -able for the purpose of (a)promoting local authority cooperation (.
cooperation bet multiple local authorities, include municipal enterprises) in implement investment projects, (b)identifying potential legal obstacle in this connection, (c)helping Details of focus area for measure and component 41German Recovery and Resilience Plan the Länder to design and establish similar public- private institution at the regional level, (d)expanding the scope of the above-mentioned research project to include the identification of investment barriers, along proposal and strategy for eliminate such barriers, and (e)expanding e-learning opportu -nities to promote kno -building and capacity- building among administrative authorities.
In order to maximise the efficiency of interaction bet public and private actors, it be crucial to remove administrative obstacle possible in order to reduce the cost that company incur due to red tape.
Removing administrative obstacle also enhance the efficiency of public administrations.
With these objective in mind, the federal and Länder government adopt a joint ﬁProgramme for an efficient public administration that benefit citizen and businessesﬂ on 2 December 2020.
One of the programme™s main priority be to simplify and expedite administrative procedures, such a the procedure involve in implement funding programmes.
The programme also provide for targeted measure to recruit and increase staffing, in order to speed up planning and approval decisions.
It might also be useful to monitor the implementation of the programme and early decision that have be take (.
the possible formation of expert teams; the deployment of planning expert and environmental law expert to public authorities; the introduction of a positive planning culture; the intensified use of digital technology) by conduct quantitative evaluation at regular intervals, for example in the form of an annual progress report.
On 5 November 2020, the German government adopt the Investment Acceleration Act (Gesetz zurBeschleunigung von Investitionen, short title Investitionsbeschleunigungsgesetz), be intend specifically to strengthen, and to ensure the up-to-date design of, entrepreneurial condi -tions in investment projects.
The Act aim to reduce compliance cost that business and administrative authority incur in connection planning and approval procedures.
Key element here include: establish the option for take immediate action on infrastructure project transregional signi -ficance; simplify territorial impact assessment for infrastructure projects; and planning approval procedure a a prerequisite for the approval of certain rail infrastructure projects.
In addition, the Act shorten administrative court proceeding by shift first-instance jurisdiction for plan approval procedure in connection infrastruc -ture project (such a regional road construction, port project and turbines) from administrative court to high administrative courts.
Details of focus area for measure and component Table 12: Reducing barrier to investment Title of measure Volume in • thousandClimateDigitalReform CSR EU agshipﬁPartnerschaft DeutschlandﬂŠReducing barrier to public and private investment activity 5.
Modernise Joint programme of the federal government and the Länder for an efficient administration that benefit citizen and business ŠReducing barrier to public and private investment activity 5.
Modernise Investment Acceleration Act ŠReducing barrier to public and private investment activity 6.
Institutional governance of the German Recovery and Resilience Plan 43German Recovery and Resilience Plan Institutional governance of the German Recovery and Resilience Plan The further implementation of the Draft German Recovery and Resilience Plan at the European level be subject to a general agree -ment on the Multiannual Financial Frame and the EU recovery instrument Next Generation EU.
In addition, the draft be gear to the application requirement of the Council position on the Recovery and Resilience Facility and may need to be adapt once a final agreement have be reach the European Parliament.
The draft form the basis for a consultation the European Commission, include on the still-to-be-defined goal and mile tone for the individual measures, the aim of finalise the GRRP in connection the National Reform Programme in April 2021 a view to the final adopt regulation on the RRF, and send it to the European Commission.
The Federal Ministry of Finance coordinate the application for RRF fund and the use of these fund and, a the authority responsible for the overall process, be the point of contact for EU institutions.
The process be coordinate closely the Federal Chancellery, the responsible line ministry and the German Bundestag.
The involvement of major stake -holders be reflect in the setting of priority and in specific project and reform under the recovery plan.
It be plan in principle to submit a biannual report on the implementation status of the GRRP in connection the Draft Bu Plan and the National Reform Programme (NRP).
In a federal context, the German Länder be key player and multiplier in the preparation of the GRRP and be therefore involve in the preparation of the draft of the GRRP at an early stage.
An ordinary referral on this take place at the conference of the minister of finance, together a first debate on the NRP.
In addition, the Bundesrat be involve later in the process, if possible Œ but not necessarily Œ in conjunction the review of the NRP, before the GRRP be submit to the European Commission for evaluation and to the Council for approval.
For project that directly affect the competence of the Länder the allocation of responsibility among the various government level in Germany, close technical coordination the Länder be imperative it come to both the development and implementation of projects.
The federal govern -ment therefore play a coordinating role the national context.
The social partner be important point of contact for the federal government regard to frame condition and investment that secure jobs.
Hence the social partners, in particular, involve in dra up the GRRP, in accordance the Euro -pean Commission™s recommendation in it 2021 Annual Sustainable Gro Strategy.
The federal government consult the social partner during the preparation of the annual economic report, include respect to the NRP.
GRRP measure may also be discuss in future consultations, among other things.
The National Productivity Board (Nationaler Produktivitätsausschuss) be ask for an (ex ante/ ex post) Federal Ministry of Finance, the Federal Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs, the Federal Ministry for Economic Affairs and Energy, and the Federal Chancellery, together the German Bundesbank, hold discussion at the national level the social partner (represented by the BDA, BDI, DGB and ver.
di) on current issue of economic and fiscal policy, and discuss productivity trend the National Prod-uctivity Board.
During the Macroeconomic Dialogue on 24 November 2020, the focus of the GRRP discuss the social partner and the chair of the National Productivity Board.
Published by Federal Ministry of Finance Public Relations Division Wilhelmstraße 97 10117 Berlin December 2020 More information be available onlineat .
This brochure be publish a part of the German federal government™s public relations.
It be distribute free of charge and be not intend for sale.
Vol 397 June 19, 2021 2331Neutralising antibody activity against SARS-CoV-2 VOCs .
Variant of Concern (VOC), first detect in India, be now dominant in the UK, have rapidly 1 displace the .
strain2 that emerge in the UK the second COVID-19 in late 2020.
The ecacy of currently license COVID-19 vaccine against .
be unkno ; although it possess 12 mutation in it spike protein relative to the SARS-CoV-2 first detect in Wuhan, China, in December, 2019, .
lack mutation at amino acid position 501 or 484 in it ACE2 receptor-binding domain, commonly associate VOCs ( appendix p 2) or escape from neutralise antibody (NAbs).To determine vaccine-induced NAb escape by .
and compare activity to previous strain exist estimate for population- base vaccine efficacy, carry out an initial analysis of the Legacy study, establish in January, 2021, by University College London Hospital and the Francis Crick Institute in London, UK, to track serological response to vaccination in prospectively recruited staff volunteer (appendix p 6).
A detailed description of the methods, include the clinical cohort, virus culture conditions, genetic sequencing, and neutralisation assays, and the statistical analysis be available in the appendix (p 8).
The Legacy study approve by London Camden and Kings Cross Health Research Authority Research and Ethics committee (IRAS number 286469) and sponsor by University College London.
Using a high-throughput live-virus SARS-CoV-2 neutralisation assay (performance data be sho in the appendix p 3), determine NAb titre (NAbTs) in 250 participant (median age 42 year [IQR 33Œ52]) after either one dose (n=149; median time after rst dose=30 day [IQR 23Œ38]) or t dos (n=159; median time after second dose=28 day [IQR 21Œ37]) of BNT162b2 (PzerŒBioNTech) against ve SARS-CoV-2 strains: a strain the original spike sequence (Wild- type); a strain an Asp614Gly mutation isolate during the first of infection in the UK, in 2020 (D614G); and VOCs ., .351 (rst detect in South Africa in late 2020), and .. T dos of BNT162b2 elicit ELISA-detected anti-Wild-type spike antibody in all participants, and NAb activity against all strains, include the three VOCs tested, in all except six (3%) and nine (5%) of 159 participant lack NAb activity against .
NAbTs of serum correlate bet Wild-type and variant (appendix p 2; RS>082, p<2 × 10¹), a a bet VOCs (.
relative to Wild-type (95% CI 50Œ69), significantly more reduced than against .
(26-fold v Wild-type, 95% CI 22Œ31), and on a similar order to the reduction observe against .351 (49-fold v Wild-type, 95% CI 42Œ57).
Notably, across all variants, increase age significantly correlate reduced NAbT (appendix p 2; Œ033<RS<Œ027; 22 × 10<p<56 × 10), no correlation observe for sex or body-mass index (appendix p 4).
NAbTs reduce over time after administration of the second dose of BNT162b2: participant (n=14) attend an additional study visit 8Œ16 after their second BNT162b2 dose sho signicantly reduce NAbTs against all variant (appendix p 2; 00002<p<00134).
While the final NAbTs against Wild- type, D614G, and .
remain the quantitative range of our assay (IC 50>40), t participants™ NAbTs against VOCs .
and .351 drop below 40 on their later study visit about 3 month after their second BNT162b2 maximise population coverage, the UK extend the interval bet the t BNT162b2 doses.
Although this might have have a limited impact of protection against parental SARS-CoV-2 strain or the .
variant, the potential impact on protection from other VOCs be poorly understood.
We find that neutralisation of VOCs markedly different after only one dose of BNT162b2 (appendix p 2): although 177 (95%) of 186 participant test positive for anti-spike antibody by ELISA and mount a detectable NAb response against Wild-type (median IC50=68 [IQR 42Œ140]) and D614G (median IC50=71 [IQR 46Œ111]), median NAbTs against all VOCs below the quantitative limit of detection.
Stratification of NAbTs into three group (IC50 low [<40], medium [40Œ256], high [>256]) and assessment of the signicance of the shift in their distribution relative to Wild-type by ordered logistical regression more informative (appendix p 2).
Whereas only 39 (21%) of 186 sample have low NAbTs against Wild-type, this proportion rise to 50% against .
(p=17 × 10) and far to 75% against .351 (p<3 × 10¹) and 68% against .
Notably, the do shift in titre also signicant compare to .
(p=12 × 10), confirm reduce NAb activity against .
Notably, participant low NAbTs tend to be old than those produced medium or high response (appendix p 2), and logistical regression analysis suggest age be a significant factor in reduced NAbTs, independent of strain in our sample (appendix p 7; p=0006), follo a single dose of BNT162b2.
gro , raise the possibility that Published Online June 3, 2021 S0140-673601290-3See Online for appendixTarik Images 2332 .
Vol 397 June 19, 2021 CSw report grant from Bristol Myers Squibb, Ono-Pharmaceuticals, Boehringer Ingelheim, Roche-Ventana, Pzer, and ArcherDx, unrelated to this Correspondence; personal fee from Genentech, Sarah Canon Research Institute, Medicxi, Bicycle Therapeutics, GRAIL, Amgen, AstraZeneca, BMS, Illumina, GlaxoSmithKline, Merck Sharp & Dohme, and RocheŒVentana, unrelated to this Correspondence; and stock option from Apogen Biotech, Epic Biosciences, GRAIL, and Achilles Therapeutics, unrelated to this Correspondence.
GKa, CSw, SGan, and DLVB be joint senior authors.
RB and DLVB be member of the Genotype-to-Phenotype UK National Virology Consortium.
Funding detail and ackno can be find in the appendix.
All data (anonymised) and full R code to produce all gures and statistical analysis present in this Correspondence be available online on GitHub.
Emma C Wall, Mary Wu, Ruth Harvey, Gavin Kelly, Scott Warchal, Chelsea Sa , Rodney Daniels, Philip Hobson, Emine Hatipoglu, Yenting Ngai, Saira Hussain, Jerome Nicod, Robert Goldstone, Karen Ambrose, Steve Hindmarsh, Rupert Beale, Andrew Riddell, Steve Gamblin, Michael Ho , George Kassiotis, Vincenzo Libri, Bryan Williams, Charles S , Sonia Gandhi, *David LV Bauer @.uk Francis Crick Institute, London NW1 1AT, UK (ECW, MW, RH, GKe, SW, CSa, RD, PH, SHu, JN, RG, KA, SHi, RB, AR, SGam, MH, GKa, CSw, SGan, DLVB); National Institute for Health Research (NIHR) University College London Hospitals (UCLH) Biomedical Research Centre, London, UK (ECW, RB, VL, BW); NIHR UCLH Clinical Research Facility, London, UK (ECW, RB, VL, BW); University College London, London, UK (EH, YN, VL, BW, CSw, SGan); Department of Infectious Disease, St Mary™s Hospital, Imperial College London, London, UK (GKa)1 Public Health England.
SARS-CoV-2 variant of concern and variant under investigation in England, Technical brieng 13.
Preliminary genomic characterisation of an emergent SARS-CoV-2 lineage in the UK dened by a novel set of spike mutations.
Feb 4, 2021. characterisation-of-an-emergent-sars-cov-2- lineage-in-the-uk-dened-by-a-novel-set-of- (accessed June 2, 2021).
SARS-CoV-2 infection induces long-lived bone marrow plasma cell in humans.
Nature 2021; publish online May 24. s41586-021-03647- of factor aside from virus strain (appendix p 5), provide a basis to understand observed vaccine ecacy failure in other combination of vaccine and target population.
6In the case of single-dose recipients, our data show that NAbTs be signicantly lo against .
and .351 VOCs relative to ., imply that although a single dose might still aord considerably more protection than no vaccination, single-dose recipient be likely to be less protect against these SARS-CoV-2 variants.
These data, therefore, suggest that the benet of delay the second dose, in term of population coverage and increase individual NAbTs after the second dose,7 must now be against decreased efficacy in the short-term, in the context of the spread of .. World , our data highlight the ongoing need to increase vaccine supply to allow all country to extend second-dose protection as quickly a possible.
In the long term, note that both increase age and time since the second dose of BNT162b2 signicantly correlate decreased NAb activity against .
and .351Šboth of be also characteristic of the population in the UK at high risk of severe COVID-19 (ie, old and vaccinate earlier), independent of other exist factor such a compromise immune status or comorbidity, or geographic-specific response to vaccination.
Consequently, far booster immunisation of Joint Committee on Vaccination and Immunisation Priority Groups in the UK and similar group in other counties, a a others lo vaccine-induced NAbTs than the cohort of BNT162b2 recipient study here (ideally modify vaccine that induce NAbs that broadly neutralise emerge VOCs) be more likely to be require to maintain the high level of NAbs in region .
or other equally NAb- resistant strain become VOC present a dual challenge of reduced vaccine efficacy akin to the .351 VOC, and increase transmissibility beyond the .
The impact of such a change be challenge to predict: it remain difficult to assess precisely to extent the reduction in NAbTs observe impact vaccine efficacy and increase disease severity in a vaccinated population, especially give the multiple factor that contribute to this process, such a long-lived humoral immunity.
3Nevertheless, a recent analysis of available NAb and vaccine efficacy data4 have attempt to establish correlate of protection against early strain of SARS-CoV-2 and, in the context of this model, our data suggest that most participant that receive t dos of BNT162b2 be protect against .
infection and associate diseaseŠconsistent preliminary data 5 infer vaccine efficacy against .
in the UK base on rate of S-gene target failure during quantitative RT-PCR testing.
With increase case number and the proportion of sequencing- confirmed .
cases, couple availability of WHO International Standards and Reference Panels to standardise NAbTs across laboratories, expect that improved vaccine efficacy estimate allow more precise modelling of correlate of protection in the come months.
Ho , it be highlight that in the case of t BNT162b2 doses, our cohort of generally healthy, relatively young, recently vaccinated, and mostly single-ethnicity individual present a reasonable best-case scenario for NAb activity against SARS-CoV-2 variants.
Indeed, regardless of the absolute vaccine efficacy requirements, peak NAbTs be signicantly reduce against VOCs .
and .351 compare NAbTs against early variants, and consequently, vaccine efficacy on an individual or sub-population level become more sensitive to reduction in NAbTs occur a a For data and R code on GitHub see Crick-UCLH-Legacy- VOCs-2021-05
FEDERAL HEALTH REPORTING JOINT SERVICE BY RKI AND DESTATIS Journal of Health MonitoringDisease severity of the rst COVID-19 in Germany use report data from the national notication system FEBRUARY SPECIAL ISSUE Transparency in Healthcare (IQTIG), Berlin Unit for Medical Biometry and Statistics Disease severity of the rst COVID-19 in Germany use report data from the national notication systemAbstractAs of December 31, 2019, initial report circulate internationally of an unusual cluster of pneumonia of unkno cause in China.
By the end of January 2020, the virus aected Germany therst case conmed on January 27, 2020. .
Ho , the case have be report to the Robert Koch Institute.
This article examine these case a part of a retrospective descriptive analysis focus on disease severity.
Most case (80%) mild and t third of the case young than 60 year (median age: 50 years).
Severe case primarily report among men age 60 or over have at least one risk factor (particularly cardiovascular disease, diabetes, neurological disorder lung diseases).
Cases bet the age of 40 and 59 year have the long interval bet symptom onset and hospitalisation (median: six days) and Œif admit to an intensive care unit (ICU) Œ also the long ICU stay (median: eleven days).
This analysis provide COVID PANDEMIC FIRST WAVE GERMANY SEVERITY OF DISEASE NATIONAL NOTIFICATION SYSTEM of December 31, 2019, initial report circulate interna-tionally of an unusual cluster of pneumonia of unkno cause in China.
Initial investigation suggest an epi-demiological link to Huanan Seafood Market in Wuhan (Hubei Province, China) and a zoonotic (animal) origin.
A few day later, on January 9, 2020, the World Health -ly unkno virus a corona virus.
Initially title 2019-nCoV, the virus have now be categorise a Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) and the disease a Coronavirus Disease-2019 (COVID-19).
Due to the close link to Wuhan, human-to-human trans -missions assume to be limit at that time.
This assessment change soon a the number of case increase continuously in China and the epidemic begin spread to other a 33-year-old man employ by a company in Bavaria.
In the course of the investigation, a colleague from the Chinese branch of the company, have travel from China to facilitate and meetings, identied Robert Koch Institute, Berlin Julia Schilling , Ann-Sophie Lehfeld ,Dirk Schumacher, , Alexander Ullrich ,Michaela Diercke , Silke Buda ,Walter Haas Robert Koch Institute, Berlin Department of Infectious Disease Epidemiology Federal Institute for Quality Assurance and Journal of Health Monitoring (S)Protection against Infection Act (Infektionsschutzgesetz, IfSG) and subsequently report to the federal state author-the Robert Koch Institute (RKI).
All case report to the Robert Koch Institute up to October 26, 2020 -oV-2.
Therefore only acid detection) SARS-CoV-2 infection, irrespective of clinical symptom be total of 437,866 COVID-19 case have be report to the RKI by 26 October 2020.
Of these, 190,816 case originate from January 2020 until mid-June 2020, or report 25.
This study only include case that provide data on age, hospital status and death (n=166,662 by report 25).
In addition, hospital admission and discharge date also require to calculate peri -ods in context of hospitalisation.
This information only available in around half of all cases, a contin-uous decrease in the number of case that provide this information a of report 20.
Assessing disease severity base on current case number may lead to an underestimation of the proportion of severe and fatal cases.
In order to assess disease severity regard pro-portions of serious disease outcome and fatal cases, only numerator and denominator should be use for period relatively reliable information be available for both parameters.
Previous analysis have sho that completeness of hospitalisation data decrease contin-uously the closer the reporting date be to the date of the analysis.
As assume that miss data not be provide in a timely manner and further correction be a the source of the infection.
Finally, contract trace and investigation at the local, regional and national level in Germany.
A second cluster consist of t case that among a group of individuals, repatriate from China.
They test positive after their arrival and subsequently hospitalise for isolation, the other passengers, repeatedly test negative, remain in provide valuable information about the transmission of the novel virus in Germany virus in Germany gain momentum in February, at the beginning of March and trigger by outbreak relate to carnival event and to individual return from ski resort (especially from Italy and Austria).
Extensive infection and control measure implement and contain this until mid-June.
The situation in Germany have be continually assess use the Pandemic Severity Assessment by WHO (PISA), consider transmission, disease sever-ity and impact on the health on disease severity a one part of the risk assess-ment and in order to prepare for the upcoming autumn/ .MethodsThe follo descriptive, retrospective analysis be base oV-2 infection Journal of Health Monitoring (S)for binary response (‚yes™ or ‚no™), the default set to ‚no™.
Ho , an additional parameter Œ the general availability of clinical data (‚yes™, ‚no™) Œ previously make bet response and use to evaluate mild and moderate case and a SARS-CoV-2 infection report to have die due to COVID-19 (ﬁdied ofﬂ) a a people have underlying condition (in addition to COVID-19).
In the latter case, it be impossible to conclusively identify the cause of death, but COVID-19 be assume to have con -tributed to the death (ﬁdied ).
soft ; these include disease of the cardiovascular system, diabetes, neurological disorders, lung diseases, kidney diseases, cancer, immunological disorder and liver .Results a group of people have be repatriate to Germany become kno at the end of of Febru -ary, the COVID-19 outbreak gain momentum.
This particularly the case at the beginning of March 2020, and, a of report 10, the outbreak develop into Figure 1).
include case that report by report 20 (n=152,984).Furthermore, interval calculate use case only one hospital stay.
Intervals relate to symptom onset consider only case symptom onset before care unit (ICU) admission and before alculations of the length of only consider case information on admission and discharge date before 26 October 2020.
Date of death use in lieu of a discharge date if this not calculate use the standard Ger-man population a of 31 December 2019.
Analyses carry out StataSE 15, Microsoft Excel 2010 and R (version .1).In line the premise of provide ‚t meaningful decimal point, number be provide in other distinction be make bet mild, moderate, severe and critical case (Info box), but these distinction be not mutually exclusive.
These category be base on the initial description of disease severity dra up by the China and a preliminary assessment of disease severity (.
acute respiratory distress syndrome -tion soft under ‚clinical data™.
The soft provide Info box:Disease severityDenition base on the notication soft data available, no pneumonia, no hospitalisation, not deceasedModerateClinical data available, pneumonia, no hospitalisation, not decease SevereHospitalised (regardless of availability of clinical data, intensive care and death)Critical Hospitalised, intensive care (regardless of availability of clinical data and death)Fatalities (regardless of availability of clinical data and hospitalisation)Journal of Health Monitoring (S)60-to 79-year-olds (19%, n=29,492).
Although only 12% of case (n=17,822) occur among the old group (80--es per 100,000 inhabitants, follo by 40- to 59-year-olds(226 per 100,000) and 20- to 39-year-olds (209 per100,000).
Infants, child and adolescent general-aged 0 to 4 (1%, n=1,462), and 70 per 100,000 among5-to 19-year-olds (%, n=8,015).
The percentage of case among old people (aged 60 or older) increase from 16% Demographic distribution and symptomsAround 52% of the 152,984 case that have be report by report 20 and provide information about age, hospitalisation and death involve .
Whereas at the beginning of the , slightly more men have be reverse and the proportion of case rise among .
The rate peak in report 15 at 57%.
The majority of all case (35%, n=53,392) among 40- to 59-year- olds, follo by 20- to 39-year-olds (28%, n=42,801) and Figure Number of report COVID- case in Germany by age group and median age over The majority of COVID-19 case report during the rst among young or middle-aged of Health Monitoring (S)symptoms include runny nose (22%, n=30,179) and sore throat (19%, n=26,961).
Pneumonia and dyspnoea (short -ness of breath) occur primarily among people age 60 or older, runny nose much more com -mon among young age group (Table 1 ).
It have be pos-sible to report loss of smell and taste a symptom since report 17.
Bet report 17 and report-ing 20, at least one of these symptom report in % (2,126 of 23,403) of .2 Disease severity levelAs 80% of all case clinical data (n=110,789) not report to have result in hospitalisation, pneumonia, or death, they assume to have be mild (Table 2 ).
The percentage of mild case high among young groups, in report 10 to around 37% in report 15.
In contrast, the percentage of case among 40- to 59-year-olds, around 48% in report 11, decreased, and by report 20 have stabilise at around 30%; the same applies to case among 20- to 39-year-olds, account for 32% of cases.
This same distribution of case by age over time be also clear from the median age, increase from 43 year in report 10 to 53 year in report 15, but have decrease again to 46 year by report 20 ( Figure 1 ).
Overall, both the median and the mean value be 50 data available in 138,464 of the 152,984 cases.
Across all age groups, cough (51%, n=70,099), fever (42%, n=58,447) and general symptom such a , and muscle and body ache (38%, n=52,025) most frequently reported.
Other frequently report respiratory SymptomTotal N (clinical data available)N (number of responses) %Coughs Fever General symptomsRunny noseSore throat Tachypnoea Table Age-specic percentage of report symptom in case clinical data ** ARDS = Acute Respiratory Distress Syndrome Most case of Health Monitoring (S)sented any report risk factors.
Overall, many case that result in hospitalisation involve at least one report risk factor (70%, n=10,017).
The most frequently mention risk factor cardiovascular disease (67%), diabetes (29%) and neurological disorder (29%) (Table 4 ).Critical case (intensive care, fatalities) A total of 24,827 case that result in hospitalisation include data about the patient have be treat in ICU.
Among these, 14% (n=3,418) receive treatment in ICU (Table 2 ); the majority men (70%, n=2,396).
The large percentage of case treat in intensive care during report 13 (859 cases, 19%).
Among all cas-es treat in ICU that provide information on clinical data (n=3,290) Œ including, therefore, data about the patient have receive ventilation Œ 23% ventilated.
In total, 1,619 (47%) out of 3,418 ICU case deceased; and among these 523 decease in ICU (84% out of 626 information on the relevant dates).
Information about report risk factor for patient treat in ICU avail-able in 61% of case (2,071 of 3,418).
Among these, 20% have no report risk factor (n=418), one-third (31%, n=643) have one risk factor and 49% (n=1,010) have at least t risk factor (Table 3 ).
The majority of patient treat-ed in ICU have report risk factors, but -ences become apparent.
More than half of 20- to 39-year-olds treat in ICU (53%, n=35) have no report risk factor.
The percentage of patient no risk factor lo increase age, to 11% (n=54) among those age 80 or above.
The data sho that patient treat in ICU mainly have cardiovascular disease (70%), follo by diabetes (33%) and neurological disorder (30%, Table 4 ).and fell to 62% among 60- to 79-year-olds and to 38% among patient age 80 or older.
In contrast, the percentage of severe or critical case high among patient age 80 or older.
Almost every second case among this group result in a hospitalisation, and one in three case end (n=12,478) of mild case ( Table 3 ) and the percentage of ca -es underlying condition increase in line disease severity Œ represent 89% of those die (n=4,223).Severe casesA total of 18% of case (n=27,466) hospitalised, or old (48%, Table 2 ).
The high percentage of hospi-talised case occur in report 16 (22%) and in patient age under 60 in report 10 (0 to 4 years: 25%; 5 to 19 years: 13%; 20 to 39 years: 13%; 40 to 59 years: 20%).
The high percentage of hospitalised case among the 60-to-79 age group occur in report 18 (43%) and for case age 80 or old in report 12 (65%).
Among men, 21% of case hospitalised; this applies to 15% of (men account for 55% of all hos-pitalised cases; ratio of men to =).
A total of 23% (n=6,321) of hospitalised case deceased.
The high num-bers of fatal case in hospital (26%) among severe case report in report 14 (n=1,568) and report 15 (n=1,242).Information about risk factor available in 52% of all hospitalise case (n=14,245).
One-third (30%, n=4,228) have no report risk factor, 17% (n=2,380) have more than three report risk factor (Table 3 ).
Severe case among young group (0 to 39 years) in particular also pre-Severe case report predominantly among men age 60 or old have at least one risk factor.
Journal of Health Monitoring (S)Total number of case information on disease severity level (yes, no)Number of case by disease severity levelPercentage (%) of all case in this age group by disease severity levelMild (no pneumonia, no hospitalisation, not deceased)Total Moderate (pneumonia, no hospitalisation, not deceased)Total Severe (hospitalisation, irrespective of intensive care and death)Total Intensive care (hospitalisation, and treat in intensive care)Total Fatalities (irrespective of symptom and hospitalisation) Total Table Age-specic distribution accord to Data on mild and moderate course refer to Journal of Health Monitoring (S)Total number of case information on risk factor (yes, no) No risk factor (%)One risk factor (%)T risk factor (%) Three or more risk factor (%)Mild (no pneumonia, no hospitalisation, not deceased)Total Moderate (pneumonia, no hospitalisation, not deceased)Total Severe (hospitalisation, irrespective of intensive care and death)Total Intensive care (hospitalisation, and treat in intensive care)Total Fatalities (irrespective of symptom and hospitalisation) Total Table Age-specic distribution of case data Journal of Health Monitoring (S)and, depend on the interval in question, that also pro -vided data about symptom onset, hospital admission date death.
Interval bet symptom onset and hospital admissionIn total, 75% of case hospitalise eight day of symptom onset; 50% hospitalise after four day (Table 5 ).
The interval bet symptom onset and hospi-tal admission one day long among case treat in days) among fatalities.
The high percentage of people admit to hospital on the day of symptom onset (25%) find among case age 0 to 4 and among those age 80 or above.
In contrast, the long interval bet symp-40-to 59-year-olds (median: six days).
Length of hospital stayThe case consider in this study hospitalise for a median of nine day (Table 5 ).
In total, 75% discharge after about t at the late (interquartile range: A total of % (n=8,616) of the case consider result in death (Table 2 ).
More fatality occur among men than (56%, n=4,833).
Moreover, most fatal case among case age 60 or old (95%) and, in particular, 79 or above (63%).
Out of the 8,616 fatal cases, 6,321 case have be hospitalise (73%) and 1,619 have be treat in ICU (this amount to 26% of fatality that occur in hospital).
Among hospitalised fatal case in ICU, and that provide clinical data, 341 have acute respira-tory failure (ARDS) and 416 have be ventilated.
Informa-tion about risk factor available for 55% (n=4,735) of the fatal cases: around one-third have either one, t or three risk factors, respectively, 11% have no risk factor (Table 3 ).
The most frequently report risk factor cardiovascular disease (74%), neurological disorder (37%) and diabetes (30%, Table 4 ).
Intervals relate to hospitalisationIntervals relate to hospitalisation calculate use case that have only be hospitalise once (n=151,014, 99%) Risk factorsTotal HospitalisedIntensive care unitFatalities n%n%n%n%Cases at least one risk factor Cardiovascular diseases Neurological disordersDiabetesLung diseasesKidney diseaseImmunological disordersCancer Liver diseaseTable Distribution of report risk factor in severe case Journal of Health Monitoring (S)hospitalisation, regardless of they ventilate or result in a fatality (Table 5 -Length of ICU stayOf the 3,418 case that require intensive care, only 723 cas-es (21%) could be consider (as the majority of case do not provide dates).
On average, case spend a median of nine day in intensive care (Table 5 ).
The majority (75%) receive intensive care for no more than 18 day (interquartile range: 4 to 17 days).
The median length of hospitalisation long among 60- to 79-year-olds at eleven days, follo by ten day among case age 80 or older.
In addition, the length of hospitalisation increase disease severity ( the exception of fatalities).Interval bet hospital admission and ICU admissionOn average, case that admit to hospital move directly to ICU (median: zero days); 75% of case require intensive care no later than three day after Table Intervals (in days) relate to hospitalisation and death by age group, sex, intensive care status, ventilation status and death* stay in ICU.
F Any discrepancy bet individual category and the total number of case be due to miss = days, ICU = intensive care unit, IQR = interquartile range, .
= no data Symptom onset until hospital admissionLength of hospital stayHospital admission to ICU admissionLength of ICU stay Hospital admission until death in hospitalSymptom onset until deathnMedian d (IQA)nMedian d (IQA)nMedian d (IQA)nMedian d (IQA)nMedian d (IQA)nMedian d (IQA)Total Age .
... SexWomen MenIntensive care unitYes NoVentilation Yes NoFatalities Yes NoJournal of Health Monitoring (S) middle-aged adultsby a high proportion of case in adult bet the age of 20 and 59 (63%).
At the beginning of the outbreak, the acted population comparatively young, a medi -an age of 43 years.
Ho , by report 20, the pro -of 50 year over the entire observation period correspond With an incidence of 314 case per 100,000 inhabitants, -ber of outbreak in old people™s and nursing home at the peak of the in spring 2020 may have play a role in this, and also explain the high incidence in this age group.
outline that outbreaks in nurse home rise continuously bet report 13 and report 22, average around 19 case per outbreak.
Moreover, these outbreak lead more frequently to trans -missions compare outbreak in other setting (.
households).The majority of case mild-marily characterise by mild case (80%).
Ho , the proportion of mild case decrease in the age group 60 year and old and be 38% in the old group (80 or old- China [14Œ16], describe old age a the great risk factor associate severe case and those result in death.
In addition to a large number of case among young people a comparatively high 4 to 18 days); men require intensive care slightly longer than .
The long length of stay in ICU (median: eleven 60-to 79-year-olds (median: ten days).
If fatal case be exclude (n=223, median eleven days, interquartile range: 5 to 21 days), 40- to 59-year-olds still remain for the long period in ICU a median of 13 day (interquartile range:8 to 20), follo by case age 80 or old (median t , interquartile range: 4 to 29).Interval bet hospital admission and death (in hospital)A median of nine day elapse bet hospital admission and death in hospital (Table 5 ); 75% of these case have die by their 18th day in hospital (interquartile range: 5 to 18 days).
On average, this interval shorter among the very old (median: eight days) and long among young groups, men and by increase severity.
Interval bet symptom onset and deathA median of eleven day pass bet symptom onset and death ( Table 5 ); 75% of fatal case die 18 day of symptom onset (interquartile range: 7 to 18 days).
On average, this period one day short among case over 80 (median: ten) and increase decrease age.
In severe case that require intensive care, the interval increase to up to 16 day (median).
aim of this article to describe disease severity of - The 40-to-59 age group hospitalise at a late stage than other age group and, on average, spend the long time in intensive of Health Monitoring (S)pandemic, hospitalisation recommend for all patient test positive (including, therefore, for mild cases) in order to ensure isolation and explain the high proportion of hospitalisation among young group at the beginning of the .
As the pandemic progressed, almost half of patient age 80 or old and a third of 60- to 79-year-olds admit to hospital.
The descriptive analysis also identied sex-specic dierences bet severe and critical cases: men account for 55% of hospi-talisations and 70% of all case treat in ICU.
Men also spend one day longer in ICU (median).
This be in line other clinical report that have also demonstrate more severe case among men; these can probably be attribute Ho , the evidence be inconclusive and research be still disease of the cardiovascular system, and diabetes.
Com - , the proportion of case neurological disorder increase among all case at least one risk factor.
At 25%, these case represent as frequently a case diabetes.
This could be due to the high percentage of people from old people™s and nursing homes, among neurological disorder such a dementia be more common.
Diseases of the cardiovascular system -tors in severe case by other study in Germany [25Œ29].
describe this aspect in detail and list kidney disease and obesity a other common risk factor .
Ho , obesity cannot be report systematically by -ney disease be mention less frequently in the data, but proportion of mild disease, the extensive testing strategy put in place in Germany for early, precise detection also have play a role in the high proportion of mild cases.
Over time, this strategy expand to include contact trace in outbreak and the screening of certain popula-tion group so that more mild and asymptomatic case addition, increased screening measure put in place due to the high risk in old people™s and nursing home could and, therefore, to be treat more promptly.
The short inter -val bet symptom onset and hospital admission in the age group 80 year and old (median: t days) support this case report predominantly among men age 60 or old have at least one risk factorIn total, 18% of case result in hospitalisation and among these 70% have at least one report risk factor.
A compar --liminary analysis of disease severitysho that the pro-portion of case report risk factor among hospitalised case have increase from 50% to 70%.
How -ever, during the course of the pandemic, reporting of SARS- C, and a such, this increase could be explain by improvement in risk factor reporting.
Ho , risk factor be also dis -tributed by age group.
Children, adolescent and young adult age from 20 to 39, in particular, only make up a small proportion of hospitalisations, but frequent-ly admit to hospital despite have no report risk factor.
It be important to note that at the beginning of the Journal of Health Monitoring (S)(median).
At the same time, this age group also demon -strates the long median ICU stay of eleven day (medi-an total ICU stay nine days).
In contrast, the short medi- older case could be relate to the high proportion of fatality in old age groups.
As such, the length of ICU stay also calculat-ed after exclude fatal cases.
Among case age 80 or old-er, the duration increase from a median of six to t days.
In contrast, the length of stay among 40- to 59-year- ho , at 13 day (median), this group still have the long -est stay in ICU.
Since both, the interval bet symptom onset and hospitalisation, a a the length of time spend in intensive care, long in this age group, it be possible that the risk of severe case that this age group face be underestimated and that these case be only admit to hospital at a late and, therefore, more severe stage.
As a result, they may require long period of hos-pitalisation and intensive care due to the advanced stage of the disease.
Ho , the small number of case treat -ed in intensive care that could be consider mean that this analysis can only provide limitedndings in this regard, see also the limitation set out below.
LimitationsThis analysis primarily face the limitation typically asso-ciated and surveillance data.
could be the predominant involvement of university hospital in the latter study.
University hospital specialise in severe case and treat them disproportionately often due to the therapeutic option that they can provide, such a ECMO (extracorporeal membrane oxygenation) and renal replace-ment therapies, are, in turn, benecial to these case due to the patents™ risk factors.
(ten days), compare eight day in Docherty et nine day in the present study, Dreher et - of just 50 case and do not include any patient receive intensive care.
This suggest an overestimation of critical ca -es in the present analysis due to a high data complete-ness among critical case (cases in ICU, fatal cases), even-tion system a a (see Chapter ).The 40-to-59 age group hospitalise later and, on average, spend the long time in intensive careThe length of time bet symptom onset and hospital admission be relevant to clinical management.
This period long among the 40-to-59 age group, at six day Journal of Health Monitoring (S)further research.
In addition, the high proportion of fatal case among the case treat in ICU suggest that infor-mation on ICU stay be well report for fatal case (or case a long period of hospitalisation) in the -timated.
Finally, once case have be report and recorded, them and to gain information about change over time and report this update information after .
This can mean that precise information about disease severity, in particular, be delay or unavailable.
Ho , if further information be available, it be usually available for severe and critical cases.
The high proportion of severe case about the correlation bet disease severity and increas-ing age.
The data on 40- to 59-year-olds, and this particu-larly applies to critical cases, could indicate that the risk of severe disease increase earlier than previously thought; this should be further investigated.
Cardiovascular diseas -es, diabetes and neurological disorder report a relevant risk factors.
Due to the limitation of the surveil -lance data use here, ho , it be not possible to deter -mine causal relation bet risk factor and disease severity.
Nevertheless, this analysis provide valuable information about disease severity of COVID-19 and par-facilities (.
Accordingly, if peo -ple mild or asymptomatic disease do not visit doctor or test centres, they not be diagnose and thus not -tively and subjectively severe case be more likely to lead to a doctor™s visit and this increase the likelihood of a diagnosis among certain age group and increase severity.
As such, mild and asymptomatic case tend to be underreported severe case be disproportion-ately overreported.
The proportion of mild case be con-sistent international experience; ho , these num -bers be also dependent on the recommend and implement test strategy a a test capacity (all of have to be establish at the beginning of the It can be assume that the proportion of mild case in the present analysis also Germany.
In comparison other study in Germany, system, but case require intensive care and, thus, ven-tilation be clearly underrepresented.
Data from Tolksdorf et Karagiannidis et that around one-third of hospitalisation require intensive care; -as this study find this to be 12%.
A similar picture emerge for case exist risk factors.
Data completeness for risk factor of 52% among hospitalise cases, actually seem to be reported, suggest a general underreporting of risk factors.
European Child & Adolescent Psychiatry ORIGINAL CONTRIBUTION Impact oftheCOVID-19 pandemic onquality oflife andmental health inchildren andadolescents inGermany UlrikeRavens-Sieberer 1 AnneKaman 1 MichaelErhart 1,2,3 JanineDevine 1,4 RobertSchlack 5 ChristianeOtto 1 Received: 29 October 2020 / Accepted: 16 January 2021 © The Author(s) 2021 Abstract The COVID-19 pandemic have cause unprecedented change in the life of billion child and adolescents.
First non- representative study from China, India, Brazil, the US, Spain, Italy, and Germany point to a negative mental health impact.
The current study be the rst nation representative study to investigate the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on health-related quality of life (HRQoL) and mental health of child and adolescent in Germany from the perspective of child themselves.
A representative online survey conduct among n = 1586 family 7- to 17-year-old child and adolescent bet May 26 and June 10.
The survey include internationally establish and validate instrument for measure HRQoL (KIDSCREEN-10), mental health problem (SDQ), anxiety (SCARED), and depression (CES- DC).
Results compare data from the nation , longitudinal, representative BELLA cohort study ( n = 1556) conduct in Germany before the pandemic.
T -thirds of the child and adolescent report be highly burden by the COVID-19 pandemic.
They experience signicantly lo HRQoL (% vs. %), more mental health problem (% vs. %) and high anxiety level (% vs. %) than before the pandemic.
Children low socioeconomic status, migration background and limit live space aected signicantly more.
Health promotion and prevention strategy need to be implement to maintain children™s and adolescents™ mental health, improve their HRQoL, and mitigate the burden cause by COVID-19, particularly for child be most at risk.
Key COVID-19 Mental health Quality of life Anxiety Depression Children and adolescent Introduction The Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic have lead to rapid, unprecedented change to the life of billion of child and adolescents.
Faced countless death and hundred of thousand of people be infected, most country have implement massive preven -tive measures.
The prevalence of COVID-19 in child be low (bet % and %) and most child only display mild physical symptom or be asymptomatic [ 1Œ4].
How -ever, COVID-19 may not be a severe and deadly in child a it be in adults, it impact on their health-related quality of life (HRQoL) and mental health be not yet under -stood suciently .
Children and adolescent face mas -sive change in their daily lives, include school closures, home connement, and social distancing rules, can burden them substantially [ 5Œ7].
Furthermore, violence against child be report to have increase under home connement leave child at risk of abuse and trauma.
Ulrike Ravens-Sieberer and Anne Kaman contribute equally to this (shared rst authorship).
Supplementary Information The online version contain supplementary material available at 7-021-01726 -5.
* Ulrike Ravens -Sieberer raven -sieberer@ 1 Department ofChild andAdolescent Psychiatry, Psychotherapy, andPsychosomatics, University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany 2 Alice Salomon University ofApplied Science, Berlin, Germany 3 Apollon University ofApplied Science ofHealthcare Economy, Bremen, Germany 4 Argora Clinic, Psychosomatic Clinic andOutpatient Center, Berlin, Germany 5 Department ofEpidemiology andHealth Monitoring, Robert Koch Institute, Berlin, Germany European Child & Adolescent Psychiatry Particularly child low socioeconomic status and pre -existing mental health problem may be expose to cumula -tive risks.
This assumption be base on a solid body of previ -ous research demonstrate that a low socioeconomic status of child [ 9Œ11], low parental education and migration statusare risk factor for mental health problem among children.
Also experience home connement, it can be assume that child live in small apartment be more stressedŠconcluding from the literature indicat -ing that limit live space can aect mental health.
During the pandemic child also receive substantially less paediatric healthcare if outpatient daycare center be closed, result in some children™s diseases remain untreated .Childhood and adolescence involve numerous biopsycho -social change and challenges, include gain independ -ence from parents, explore various domain of identity, and cop diculties in everyday life and at school .
Adolescence be a sensitive period for social develop -ment an increase need for social interactions.
Cop -ing the current situation and comply the cur -rent restriction on top of this can be especially dicult for child and adolescent since these circumstance can be experience a be incongruent their developmental tasks.
The challenge and consequence of COVID-19 might therefore have a tremendous impact on their HRQoL and mental health.
Currently, there be a gro interest in research on the mental health of child and adolescent during the COVID-19 pandemic.
First non-representative study from China, COVID-19 spread early and initially aected most people, report increasing level of stress, anxiety and depression.
Jiao that one-third of 3- to 18-year-old child and adolescent clingy, inattentive, irritable and .
Xie that 23% of 2nd- to 6th-grade child have depressive symp -toms and 19% have anxiety symptom during the pandemic, Zhou that 44% of 12- to 18-year-olds display depressive symptoms, 37% sho anxiety, and 31% have both type of symptoms.
High level of depres -sive and anxiety symptom recently replicate by Duan etal.. T non-representative study from India child and adolescent age 5Œ18yearsand one study from Brazil child and adolescent from 6 to 12yearsunderline the negative impact of the pandemic on the mental health of children.
They find that child and adolescent experience severe psychological distress such a , helplessness, anxiety and fear.
Moreover, recent nation study from the US report psychological -being and behavioural health of child and adolescent compare to the time before the pandemic .
Further, t European non-representative study from Italy and Spain find that mental health problem such a conduct problems, irritability and loneliness in child and adolescent increase during the COVID-19 lockdo .
One non-representative survey among parent of German child and adolescentsand one qualitative German studyfurther find that child and adoles -cents be often about the COVID-19 pandemic and the associate changes.
Under normal circumstances, the prevalence of mental disorder be % a report by a meta-analysis .
The above-mentioned study thus indicate a signicant increase in mental health problem in child during the pandemic, may lead to manifest disorder over time.
There be still a lack of kno about how this prevalence have or increase the pandemic continues.
This representative COPSY study (impact of CO VID-19 on psychological health) aim to explore the HRQoL and mental health of child and adolescent age 7Œ17years during the COVID-19 pandemic and to compare it to pre- pandemic data of the nation representative study of the behaviour and llbeing of chi ldren and adolescent in Ger-many (BELLA study).Our main hypothesis : 1.
Children™s and adolescents™ HRQoL and mental health be impair during the COVID-19 pandemic.
Speci -cally, expect that child and adolescent feel burden by the pandemic, show a decrease in HRQoL, an increase in mental health problems, high level of anxiety, depression and more psychosomatic symptom during the pandemic compare to before the pandemic.
Some child and adolescent be particularly impair by the COVID-19 pandemic.
We assume that child and adolescent low socioeconomic status, migra -tion background and limit living space be aected signicantly more.
We aim to identify children™s and adolescents™ need dur -ing the pandemic and oer guidance to policymakers, paedi -atric professional and parent for safeguard the mental health of children.
Methods Study design andsampleThe nation , population-based COPSY study con -ducted in Germany bet May 26 and June 10, 2020, the country under a partial lockdo , schools, leisure facility and most store close and preventive distancing measure in place.
The COPSY study approve by the Local Psychological Ethics Commit -tee (LPEK-0151) and the Commissioner for Data Protection European Child & Adolescent Psychiatry of the University of Hamburg.
Overall, n = 3597 family child and adolescent age 7Œ17years invite to participate in the survey.
They contacted, inform about the study and ask for their informed consent.
A total of n = 1647 family consent and complete the online sur -vey via the survey soft EFS Survey from Questback.
The participation rate % (calculated accord to a formula by the American Association for Public Opinion Research, AAPOR).
After data cleaning ( n = 61 par -ticipants exclude due to implausible data), the nal sample include n = 1586 families.
Self-reports of child and adolescent gather if age at least 11years (n = 1040, 11Œ17years old, one child per family).
Parent proxy-reports gather of 11- to 17-year-olds pro -vided self-reports ( n = 1040) and of young child age 7Œ10years ( n = 546).
The data of the nal study sample match the sociodemographic characteristic of the German population (based on the 2018 microcensus; the individual range from to ).
The COPSY study design and methodology be similar to the nation , longitudinal, representative BELLA study, though sample differ on the individual level across both studies.
The BELLA study be the mental health mod -ule the German Health Interview and Examination Survey for Children and Adolescents (KiGGS) administer establish and validate questionnaire on HRQoL and mental health to children, adolescent and par -ents.
Details of the BELLA study be describe else .
Extensive data from the BELLA study conduct in Germany in 2017 ( n = 1556) use to compare the data from the COPSY study those of population-based ref -erence sample survey prior to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Due to the availability of data in dierent questionnaires, correspond subsamples of the BELLA study use for comparison.
Measures Sociodemographic variable Children and adolescent age 11Œ17years respond to the self-report version of the online survey, parent of child age 7Œ17years an the parent proxy version of the online survey.
For sociodemographic information, the child and adolescent survey include question on age and gender, the parent proxy survey include question on age, gender, marital status, occupational status, parental education and migration background.
COVID-19 burden To explore the burden of the pandemic, both version of the online survey (self- and parent proxy-reports) include self-developed pandemic-focused item (dra from our expertise in develop the KIDSCREEN measures).
We ask for the perceived overall burden of the COVID-19 pandemic and for the burden cause by social distancing and school closure a a eects of the pandemic situation on family climate.
HRQoL andmental health To assess the impact of the pandemic on HRQoL and mental health, internationally established, comparable and validated instrument follo recommendation by the International Consortium for Health Outcomes Measurement (ICHOM) used.
Self- and parent proxy-reports of the survey include the establish KIDSCREEN-10 Index, the scale on generalized anxiety from the German version of the Screen for Child Anxiety Related Disorders (SCARED)and select item from the German version of the Center for Epidemiological Studies Depression Scale (CES-DC) .
The Strengths and Diculties Questionnaire (SDQ) on mental health problem in child and adolescent only administer in the parent proxy survey of the COPSY study.
These measure not only use in the COPSY study but also in the BELLA study so that a com -parison of HRQoL and mental health before and during the pandemic possible.
The KIDSCREEN-10 Index provide a global HRQoL score cover the physical, psychological, and social facet of HRQoL.
Its ten item (., ﬁHave you felt full of energy?ﬂ) present 5-point response scale (0 = ﬁneverﬂ to 4 = ﬁal or 0 = ﬁnot at allﬂ to 4 = ﬁextremelyﬂ).
The mean score range from 0 to 4.
Scores one standard deviation below the population mean (before the pandemic) categorize a ﬁlo HRQoL.
The Strengths and Diculties Questionnaire (SDQ)assesses mental health four problem scales: emotional symptoms, conduct problems, hyperactivity, and peer prob -lems.
Each problem scale consist of ve item present three response option (0 = ﬁnot trueﬂ to 2 = ﬁcertainly trueﬂ).
According to publish cut-os, categorized par -ticipants base on the sum score into group accord to their mental health borderline and normal).
The German version of the Screen for Child Anxiety Related Disorders (SCARED)includes nine item on symptom of generalized anxiety (., ﬁI about be go to happen in the futureﬂ) be pre -sented a 3-point response scale (0 = ﬁnot true or hardly ever trueﬂ to 2 = ﬁvery true or often trueﬂ).
These 9 item be gather in a sum score high score indicate more severe symptom of generalized anxiety.
The scale score use to categorize participant into t group (those versus those generalize anxiety) base on the provide cuto by Birmaher etal..
Seven item European Child & Adolescent Psychiatry of the Geman version of the Center for Epidemiological Studies Depression Scale (CES-DC)(., ﬁI felt sadﬂ) administer and present a 4-point response scale (0 = ﬁnot at allﬂ to 3 = ﬁa lotﬂ).
A mean score gather -ing all item calculate high score indicate more severe depressive symptoms.
In the COPSY study, the internal consistency good for the analyzed self-reported KIDSCREEN-10 Index, for the parent-reported SDQ total score, and for self-reported generalized anxiety and depres -sion score ( = , , , ).
In the sample use from the BELLA study, the internal consistency for the scale mainly comparable (in the order present above: = , , , ).
Finally, psychosomatic complaint assess in self- and parent proxy-reports use the HBSC symptom check -list.
The HBSC symptom checklist assess how often child and adolescent experience eight dierent psy -chosomatic complaint (., headaches, sleep problems, irritability) during the last .
Items oered a 5-point response scale (0 = ﬁnot at allﬂ to 4 ﬁdailyﬂ).
The BELLA study do not provide comparison data for this scale.
Data analysis To investigate the perceived burden of the pandemic, the pandemic-specific item examine via descriptive statistic (frequencies, mean and standard deviations).
To evaluate dierences in HRQoL and mental health before and during the pandemic, cross-sectional data from the pre- pandemic BELLA study (control group) and the pandemic COPSY study (index group) pooled; depend on data availability, t dierent BELLA subsamples used.
Prior to multivariate regression analysis pool data, bivariate analysis conduct (cross-tabulation, chi-square tests, t-tests and ANOVAs).
The regression model pool data control for age, gender, age*gender, parental education and migration status.
We consider a p value a an indicator for signicant dierences or eects.
Prior to conduct data analyses, a po analysis conducted.
Sample size calculate to test for statistical signicance p (alpha) < and a po of p = for moderate eect ( d = ) bet t group in a particular age (7Œ10; 11Œ13; 14Œ17) and gender (females vs. males) group.
This po calculation lead to n = 612 respondent at minimum.
The po calculation conduct the G-Po soft .
As the BELLA study do not provide comparative data on psychosomatic complaints, the response to the HBSC symptom checklist present use descriptive statis -tics only.
To examine child be at high risk of be particularly impair by the pandemic, rst age and gender dierences explore in detail.
Based on a-priori theoretical considerations, child a certain sociodemographic and psychosocial prole consider a be at high risk and the result -ing group examine for impairment in the main study outcomes.
Eects describe a mean dierences and Cohens d-eect size measures.
ResultsSociodemographics Data from n = 1586 family child age 7Œ17years (un data: Mage = , SDage = , n = 793 [%] female) analyse (self- and parent proxy- reports).
The majority of the child and adolescent have no migration background [ n = 1332 (%)].
Most of their parent have a medium level of education [ n = 884 (%)], marry [ n = 1097 (%)] and employ full- time [n = 820 (%)].
Further detail on the sociodemo -graphic characteristic of the COPSY sample be present in Table 1.
The sociodemographic characteristic of the COPSY and BELLA subsamples use for the pooled regres -sion analysis on HRQoL and mental health of child and adolescent before and during the COVID-19 pandemic be depict in Supplementary Tables1 and 2.
Perceived burden ofthepandemic T -thirds [ data: n = 735 (%)] of the child and adolescent (aged 11Œ17years) state that they felt bur -dened by the COVID-19 pandemic.
More than half of the child and adolescent find homeschooling and learn -ing to be more dicult than before the pandemic [ n = 670 (%)], the majority report fe social contact during the pandemic [ n = 861 (%)], and nearly t -fth of the child and adolescent state that their relationship their friend have be impair [ n = 408 (%)].
About a fourth of the child and adolescent report that argu -ments have increase in the family [ n = 287 (%)].
Using parent proxy-reported data (parents of 7- to 17-year-olds), about a third of the parent state that dispute escalate more often [ n = 508 (%)].
duringthepandemic Before the pandemic, % ( n = 146; base on data of the BELLA study) of child and adolescent report low HRQoL; during the pandemic, % of the child and adolescent report low HRQoL ( n = 418; base on self-reported data of the COPSY study).
European Child & Adolescent Psychiatry An analysis stratied by gender reveal that a high pro -portion of girl report low HRQoL than their male peer both before and during the pandemic (Table 2).
Younger child aected signicantly more than old ones; the percentage of child report low HRQoL rise from % to % in 11- to 13-year-old child and from % to % in 14- to 17-year-olds ( p < ).Mental health beforevs.
duringthepandemic Based on parent proxy-reports, 7- to 17-year-old child and adolescent suered from more mental health prob -lems compare to before the pandemic.
The prevalence of noticeable mental health problem % ( n = 153) before the pandemic and increase to % ( n = 283) during the Table 1 Sociodemographic characteristic of the COPSY sample Un data M mean, SD standard deviation Parents of child age 7Œ17years (n = 1586)Children and adolescent age 11Œ17years ( n = 1040)n (%)M (SD)n (%)M (SD)Age of the child () ()7Œ10years 546 ()Œ11Œ13years 351 ()351 ()14Œ17years 689 ()689 ()Gender of the child Male791 ()508 ()Female 793 ()531 ()Diverse 1 ()1 ()No information 1 ()ŒAge of the parent () ()Migration background No 1332 ()879 ()Yes 254 ()161 ()Parental education Low 288 ()192 ()Medium884 ()548 ()High383 ()277 ()No information 31 ()23 ()Marital status Unmarried 140 ()87 ()Married 1097 ()717 ()In a relationship 216 ()125 ()In a registered partnership 13 ()8 ()Divorced 108 ()92 ()Wido 12 ()11 ()Occupational status Full-time employ 820 ()561 ()Part-time employ 453 ()286 ()Self-employed 67 ()49 ()Other employment 32 ()22 ()House /househusband 109 ()61 34 ()27 ()On parental leave 29 ()7 ()Unemployed 42 ()27 ()COVID-19 infection A family member infect 60 ()35 ()A relative die of COVID-19 29 ()22 () European Child & Adolescent Psychiatry pandemic.
This increase signicantly higher in 7- to 10-year-olds (from % to %) compare 11- to 13-year-olds (from % to %) ( p < ).Considerable rate for parent-reported hyperactivity [n = 233 (%)], emotional problem [ n = 210 (%)], peer problem [ n = 183 (%)] and conduct problem [n = 159 (%)] find during the pandemic.
In an analysis stratied by gender, dierent gender-specic pat -terns of mental health problem find before and dur -ing the pandemic (Table 3).Based on self-reported data of 11- to 17-year-olds, the child and adolescent experience high level of gen -eralized anxiety during the COVID-19 pandemic [ n = 251 (%)] compare before the pandemic [ n = 198 (%)].The child and adolescent also self-reported depres -sive symptoms: % ( n = 646) have trouble concentrating, % ( n = 607) have little interest or joy in activities, and % (n = 351) felt sad.
Surprisingly, no signicant increase (p > ) find in the prevalence of depressive symp -toms before vs. during the pandemic.
Linear regression analysis indicate signicant dier -ences bet COPSY (during pandemic) and BELLA (before pandemic) data on almost all mental health outcome (Table 4).
Eects small for parent-reported total mental health problems, hyperactivity and peer problem (Cohen™s f2 = , , ), and negligible for parent-reported conduct problem and self-reported generalized anxiety (Cohen™s f2 = ).With regard to the control variables, old age and female gender each associate fe parent-reported men -tal health problem in total and on the SDQ subscales, except for peer problems, increase age and sho no gender-specic eect.
A signicant interaction eect indi -cated that high age relate to strong parent-reported emotional problem in girl only.
Overall, high self-reported HRQoL find in girls, though it decrease advanc -ing age in this gender group.
Higher parental education associate fe parent-reported mental health problem in children.
Migration background relate to more total mental health problem and to more severe peer problem (both parent-reported).
Psychosomatic complaint duringthepandemic Children and adolescent age 11 to 17years self-reported substantial psychosomatic complaints; about half of the sam -ple [n = 554 (%)] felt irritable and considerable propor -tions of the sample have sleep problem [ n = 449 (%)], headache [ n = 421 (%)], felt low [ n = 352 (%)], report stomache ache [ n = 317 (%)].
Girls aected more than boys regard to have headache ( p = ), stomach ache ( p = ) and feel low ( p = ).
Risk factor formental health problem duringthepandemicThe high-risk group analysis conrmed our hypothesis that child from family (i) low education levels, or (ii) less than 20 square meter of live space per person, or (iii) a migration background consider to be at a high risk of suering a sizable impact due to the COVID-19 pandemic the family climate, a a resource, also low (the low -est 20% of all respondents).
These high-risk child and ado -lescents (n = 126) report be substantially burden by the COVID-19 pandemic signicantly more than their peer [% (.7) vs. % (.4%), p = ] and display lo self-reported HRQoL (d-ES = ; p < ) and more parent-reported total mental health problem (d-ES = ; p < ), emotional symptom (d-ES = ; p < ), conduct problem (d-ES = ; p < ), hyperactivity (d-ES = ; p < ) and peer problem (d-ES = ; p < ) a a self-reported anxiety (d-ES = ; p < ), depressive symptom (d-ES = ; p < ), and psychosomatic complaint (d-ES = ; p < ).Table 2 HRQoL in child and adolescent before vs. during the COVID-19 pandemic, stratied by gender (self-report, 11Œ17years) a Groups low and HRQoL accord to the KID -SCREEN, for details, see Methods b p value result from 2 test compare the t group of child and adolescent low HRQoL across the pre-pan -demic BELLA study and the COPSY study during the pandemic Low HRQoLaNormal/ high HRQoLaBoys Before pandemic ( n = 492) During pandemic ( n = 524) pb < .001Girls Before pandemic ( n = 460) During pandemic ( n = 515) p < .001Boys and girl Before pandemic ( n = 982) During pandemic ( n = 1039) p < .001European Child & Adolescent Psychiatry Discussion To our kno , this be the rst nation representa -tive study on the HRQoL and mental health of child and adolescent during the COVID-19 pandemic.
We find that child and adolescent in Germany feel signicantly burden by lockdo , social distancing and homeschool -ing measures.
They experience signicantly lo HRQoL and more mental health problems, especially hyperactivity and peer problems.
While young child seem to be more negatively impact by the pandemic than old chil -dren, emotional problem in girl seem to increase by age during the pandemic.
Also (particularly young) child may express their stress via psychosomatic complaints, increase during the pandemic compare to the time before, be relevant for parent and doctor to take into account child complain about bodily symptoms.
Children and adolescent low socioeco -nomic status, low parental education and migrant status be particularly burden by the eects of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Our result be highly relevant to public health and health policy.
We suggest careful balance lockdo / homeschooling measure against the mental health risk of child and strongly call for provide target men -tal health care in community and a prevention and intervention measure to support those outlined child and adolescent be severely stress by the pandemic.
Table 3 Mental health problem in child and adolescent before vs. during the COVID-19 pandemic, stratied by gender (parent-report, 7Œ17years) a Groups due to mental health problem accord to the SDQ, for details, see Methods b pŠvalues result from 2Štests compare group normal and borderline (gathered into one group) vs. accord to the SDQ across the pre-pandemic BELLA study and the COPSY study during the pandemic Mental health problem (total) Emotional symptom Conduct problem Hyperactivity Peer problem Boys Before pandemic ( n = 793)Normal %Borderline %During pandemic ( n = 816)Normal %Borderline %Pb < .001p = .007p = .004p < .001p < .001Girls Before pandemic ( n = 760)Normal %Borderline %During pandemic ( n = 768)Normal %Borderline %p < .001p = .198p = .042p < .001p = .137Boys and girl Before pandemic ( n = 1553)Normal %Borderline %During pandemic ( n = 1585)Normal %Borderline %p < .001p = .007p < .001p < .001p < .001 European Child & Adolescent Psychiatry The result concern the negative impact of COVID- 19 measure on HRQoL and mental health be in line recent non-representative study from China, India, Brazil, the US, Spain, Italy, and Germany [ 17Œ28].
How -ever, compare the impact cross-culturally, child and adolescent in Germany do not seem to be aected as negatively a in other country such a China, Spain and Italy.
Surprisingly, our study do not reveal elevated level of depression during the COVID-19 lockdo and though a high level of generalized anxiety found, the corresponding eect only negligible compare to pre-pandemic data.
In comparison to other countries, Ger -man child and adolescent may have be impact less severely during the initial phase of the pandemic, possibly due to a lo incidence and mortality rate of COVID- 19 and soft lockdo measures.
A longitudinal study be plan to assess depressive and anxiety symp -toms in German child and adolescent may increase during the ongoing situation.
Although do not observe an increase in clinically relevant depressive symptoms, our ndings indicate that child and adolescent feel highly burdened, have a sig -nicantly high risk of mental health problem than before the pandemic and suer from psychosomatic complaints.
Our future research therefore focus on psychosocial resource and resilience factor (., family cohesion and social support) that strengthen the mental health of child and adolescents.
Children and adolescent at risk of develop -ing mental health problem need to be identied early on to prevent subclinical mental health problem from develop -ing into manifest mental disorders.
Targeted early preven -tion and intervention service be need to support young people experience mental health problem and their access to health services.
Our study also sho that attention should be pay to chil -dren at high risk of suering from COVID-19 lockdo consequences, include child low socioeconomic status (., child from family low education lev -els, migration background or limited nancial resources), be in line research on social inequality and men -tal health.
To reduce the health inequality identied, nation , targeted, and low-threshold preventive meas -ures should be initiated, especially for child from socially deprive backgrounds.
Further risk factor for mental health in child find in recent US study be hardship during the crisis, include caregiving burden, job loss and income loss of the parents.
Studies show that parent and chil -dren™s mental health and stress be closely intert recent study perform during the COVID-19 pandemicoutlining that several factor lead to a high stress of parent like be single, parent young child or child emotional or behavioral dicul -ties, have nancial hardship or lose childcare.
Parents those risk factor be more likely to develop ﬁburn-outﬂ symptom during the pandemic and need to be support to avoid escalation in family include neglect and abuse and also to avoid an increase of parental mental disorders.
In time of hardship, it have be sho that mental health dete -riorates and aggression increases.
Our study indicate a deteriorate family climate, more externalizing behaviour among child and more escalating conicts at home dur -ing the pandemic.
Current research and previous health and economic disaster have sho that the risk of child abuse and neglect increase during such timesand expert Table 4 Mental health impact of COVID-19 measure on child and adolescent CI condence interval, HRQoL health-related quality of life, signicant eects be indicate in bold face a Self-reported data (11- to 17-year-olds) b Parent-reported data (7- to 17-year-olds) Constant Age Female Age*female EducationMigration back -ground During vs. before pandemicAdjusted R 2B coe (95% CI)B coe (95% CI)B coe (95% CI)B coe (95% CI)B coe (95% CI)B coe (95% CI)B coe (95% CI) ( ;) health problem (total) (; 024) symptom problem problem anxiety .00 .00 European Child & Adolescent Psychiatry that parenting be become more violent during the COVID-19 pandemic.
Thus, UNICEF, politician and paediatrician have call for support in maintain chil -dren™s health and .Children and adolescent burden by the pandemic and potentially at severe mental health risk need to be identied early on to prevent further exacerbation of psychopathology.
Along paediatric researchers, health care professional and institutions, call for raise a of the negative impact this pandemic have on child and adolescents.
Society, politicians, educational and health care professionals, a a parent need to take action to reduce the mental health impact of COVID-19 on child and ado -lescents.
Resources must be allocate and prevention and intervention program need to be establish to support vul -nerable child and adolescent and to prepare for a poten -tial second of COVID-19 or comparable future events.
In addition, suggest introduce mental health promotion and prevention program that meet the need of these chil -dren.
Guidelines for cop the pandemic aim at chil -dren and parents, and program to prevent domestic violence through community-based initiative have be present by the United States Centers for Disease Control (CDC).
The European Society for Child and Adolescent Psychiatry (ESCAP) and the American Academy of Child and Adoles -cent Psychiatry (AACAP) have provide a range of material for communicate about COVID-19 children, cop anxiety and stress, telepsychiatry, and school program to support child in cop the pandemic.
Moreover, it be recommend that parent talk to their child about the situation and their children™s concerns, listen carefully and create a exible but consistent daily routine, can give child stability and security.
The present study have the follo limitations: Dif -ferences bet mental health before and during COVID- 19 be attribute to the pandemic.
Ho , a number of other individual and societal factor may have inuenced these dierences.
Due to social distancing measures, this study do not use clinical intervie to assess clinical diagnosis of mental disorders.
We did, ho , adminis -ter internationally recommended, establish and validate screen instrument to assess HRQoL and mental health in children.
Therefore, our study have the strength to report ndings not only from parent but also from the perspective of child themselves.
The study result may be aected by response bias such a a social desirability bias or a non- response bias, ., this study only include German-speak -ing children, adolescent and parent computer literacy and access to digital device internet.
Thus, ndings may not be generalizable to country other than Germany or to other samples.
The participation rate of % in our study in the range of child health survey in the USand the , our ndings highlight the signicant mental health burden of German child and adolescent dur -ing the COVID-19 pandemic.
They allow conclusion to be dra enable health policy, prevention and clinical practice to provide suitable support in the present crisis and comparable future situations.
A plan follow-up study evaluate how child and adolescent react to the future trajectory of the COVID-19 pandemic, to assess long-term impact of the pandemic and to investigate resource and resilience factors, may help child to cope better.
Ackno The author thank all children, adolescent and their parent participate in this study for their time and involvement.
Author contribution URS be the principle investigator of the COPSY and BELLA studies, be responsible for their design, funding, data collection, analysis, and interpretation, and revise the manuscript critically; AK involve in project administration, data collection, analysis and interpretation, and the rst draft of the manuscript; CO perform the data curation, statistical analyses, interpret the data and revise the manuscript critically; ME perform the statisti -cal analyses, interpret the data and revise the manuscript critically; JD perform the literature search and contribute to the rst draft of the manuscript; RS be involve in the KiGGS study be con -ducted in close cooperation the BELLA study and revise the manuscript critically.
All author contribute to and have approve the nal manuscript.
Funding Open Access funding enable and organize by Projekt DEAL.
The COPSY study fund by the University of Hamburg and the Ministry of Health and Consumer Protection Hamburg, Ger -many.
The funders have no role in study design, data collection and analysis, decision to publish, or the preparation of the manuscript.
Data availability The data that support the ndings of this study be available from the correspond author upon reasonable request.
Compliance ethical standard Conflict of interest None of the author have a conict of interest to Access This article be license under a Creative Commons Attri -bution International License, permit use, sharing, adapta -tion, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long a you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if change made.
The image or other third party material in this article be include in the article™s Creative Commons licence, unless indicate other in a credit line to the material.
If material be not include in the article™s Creative Commons licence and your intend use be not permit by statutory regulation or exceed the permitted use, you need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder.
FEDERAL HEALTH REPORTING JOINT SERVICE BY RKI AND DESTATIS Journal of Health MonitoringPopulation an increase risk of severe COVID-19 in Germany.
Analyses from GEDA SPECIAL ISSUE Robert Koch Institute, Berlin Alexander Rommel , Elena von der Lippe ,Marina Treskova-Sch ,Stefan Scholz Robert Koch Institute, Berlin Department of Epidemiology and Health Monitoring Robert Koch Institute, Berlin Department of Infectious Disease Epidemiology Population an increase risk of severe COVID-19 in Germany.
Analyses from GEDA a minority of people test positive for COVID-19 develop a severe or critical form of the disease.
Many of these have risk factor such a old age or pre-existing condition and, therefore, be at the focus of protective measures.
The analysis present here be base on data from the German Health Update (GEDA) carry out a a nation cross-sectional telephone-based survey bet April 2019 and the presence of pre-existing conditions.
Around million people in Germany be at an increase risk of develop severe COVID-19.
Of these, million belong to the high-risk group.
An above-average number of people at risk live alone.
The prevalence of an increase risk be high among middle-aged men than among of the same age, and high proportion of people an increase risk live in Saarland and in the eastern German federal states.
Moreover, the regional in risk burden should be take into account planning interventions.
SARSCOV COVID PREEXISTING CONDITIONS SECONDARY DISEASES RISK FACTORS HOSPITALISATION MORTALITY 1.
IntroductionSARS-CoV-2 (Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome Corona -virus 2) and the Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19), have have a strong political and social impact on life in and a sharp decline in new case in summer, the number second half of November, the number of death clearly exceed the level in spring.
The disease burden from death due to COVID-19 in 2020 be above the level that normally be expect for lo respiratory infec-tions during this period.
Men account for almost t third of year of life lose to COVID-19, and people age 70 for a share of more than 70%.The vaccine that have be gradually approve since the end of 2020 be key to avoid infection and severe illness.
Since the number of vaccine available be lim-tions or other risk factors.
Of these, only a few condi-tions, such a diabetes mellitus, organ transplants, heart failure, dementia, chronic kidney disease, Do ™s syn-drome or severe obesity (body mass index >40), be also associate a strongly increase risk of hospitalisa-tion or death.
Several others, such a psychiatric dis -orders, cardiac arrhythmias, cardiovascular diseases, stroke, cancer, asthma and chronic obstructive pulmo -nary disease (COPD) be link to a moderately increased article use current data to identify the total num-ber of people at increase risk of develop severe COVID-19 in Germany.
In addition, it develop an approach to implement more in-depth analyses.
Based on data from the German Health Update (GEDA people age 15 or above have an increase risk by age, sex, level of education, household type and federal state.
Whereas the nation distribution of people an increase risk can provide important information allocate vaccines, sociodemographic factor be also use-ful in term of the likelihood of gain access to particular population group and on how best to design information .
Study design, sample and be a nation cross-sectional telephone-based survey of the resident population in Ger-many age 15 or above.
The study collect data use a specially designed, fully structure computer assist ited for the foreseeable future, access to vaccine need to be regulated.
This be particularly important if vulnerable group be to be protected.
The priority group for COVID-19 vaccination broadly fall into t categories: in addition to be often at high risk of infect themselves and others, the focus be primarily place on people an increase risk of develop a severe form of the disease (vulnerable groups).
only a minority of people have a COVID-19 infection develop severe illness.
While around 80% of the peo-ple tested positive develop mild cases, the rest require inpatient or intensive care, or died.
These be order to reduce the burden of disease cause by COVID-19, therefore, it make sense to prioritise people for the vac- The majority of these people have already reach an advanced age or have certain pre-existing conditions.
This mean that the age distribution of people an increase risk be particularly relevant plan vac-cination exist evidence can be use to clearlsk factor associate severe COVID-19.
The data demonstrate that old age be the main risk factor for hos-pitalisation and death, regardless of any pre-existing conditions.
This evidence lead the Standing Committee on Vaccination (STIKO) to recommend that old and very old people be prioritise for COVID-19 vaccination.
Moreover, many old people have pre-existing condi -GEDA /-EHISFifth follow-up survey of the German Health UpdateData holder: Robert Koch Institute Objectives: Provision of reliable information on the health status, health behaviour and health care of the population living in Ger-many, the possibility of European com -parisonsStudy design: Cross-sectional telephone surveyPopulation: German-speaking population -holds that can be reach via landline or mobile phoneSampling: Random sample of landline and mobile telephone number (dual-frame method) from the ADM sampling system (Arbeitskreis Deutscher Markt- und Sozial-forschungsinstitute .)
Sample size:Study period: GEDA survey : GEDA GEDA Further information in German be available at .geda- IndicatorsPre-existing conditionsData on the 12-month prevalence of pre-existing condition gather use the question: ‚Have you have any of the follo illness or complaint in the last 12 months?™ (For a list of the condition concerned, see Chapter ).Body and body mass indexBody and height be base on information provid-ed by the respondents.
Data on height collect use the question: ‚How tall be you if you be not shoes?™ and record in centimetres.
Data on body collect the question: ‚How much do you if you be not clothes or shoes?
Body Mass Index (BMI) be calculate use the ratio of body to body height square for help People age 55 or above ask they need help activity of daily live (ADL)or instru-mental activity of daily living (iADL).
ADLs include eat and drinking, get up from or sit do on a bed or chair, use the toilet, or bathing and sho .
iADLs include meal preparation, make phone calls, shopping, take medication, light or occasionally heavy house , and administrative tasks.
Respondents say they need help at least t of these activity categorise a need interview (CATI).
The GEDA study have be car -ried out, at interval of several years, by the Robert Koch Institute (RKI) on behalf of the German Federal Ministry of Health since 2008, and be part of the health monitoring system at the RKI.
The European Health Interview Survey (EHIS) supplement and fully integrate into the study.
The current GEDA be base on a ran-dom sample of landline and mobile phone number derive from a telephone sample collect by ADM (Arbeitskreis Deutscher Markt- und Sozialforschungsinstitute .
The sample cover the population age 15 or above living in private household and reside in Germany at the time of data intervie undertaken bet April 2019 and October 2020 by an external market and social research institute under the continuous supervision of the RKI.
A total of 23,001 (12,111 female, 10,890 male) people take part in the GEDA study provide complete intervie .
The response rate cal-culated use the standard dra up by the American Association for Public Opinion Research (AAPOR) and amount to % (RR3).
Design ini- (mobile and landline net ) use a standard calcula-tion method a part of the dual-frame design.
The sample - type (as of 31 December 2019) and education (in line Older age and certain pre-existing condition increase a person™s risk of severe COVID-19.Social determinantsEducation level be base on the CASMIN system (Com -parative Analyses of Social Mobility in Industrial Nations) and use a an indicator of social status.
Academic and vocational qualications be use to distinguish bet three groups: low, medium and high level of education.
The respondent be also categorise by household type: people live alone be distinguish from couple children, family child and people live together amilies also include single parent live adult child in the household.
Other household type include individual liv-ing people be not partner or family .3 T -one be at increase risk of develop severe COVID-19; the second include everyone this group have a strongly increase risk of develop severe disease.
The group base on derive from a systematic literature analysis carry out by the RKI a an umbrella review.
The analysis undertak -en a part of the process use by the Standing Committee on Vaccination at the RKI to draw up it recommendation on vaccination priority.
Only those condition or risk -nition, that actually survey in GEDA In order to compensate to some extent for unmea-sured morbidity, people in need of additional help be also use the criterion set out in Table 1.
An increase risk (risk group) assume for individuals: or pre-existing condition or risk factor that the literature analysis sho to be associate a: (i) High blood pressure [a](ii) Coronary heart pectoris [b] (iii) Heart attack or chronic complication [b] (iv) Stroke or chronic complication [a] (v) Diabetes mellitus [a, b](vi) Bronchial asthma [a](vii) Chronic bronchitis [a, b] (viii) Liver cirrhosis [a, b] (ix) Chronic kidney problem [a, b](x) or an additional need for help strongly increase risk (high-risk group) if they : or have at least one of the pre-existing condition or risk fac-tors that the literature analysis sho to be associate a: BMI=Body Mass Index The risk factor of cancer, dementia, rheumatological disease, organ trans -plantation, autoimmune disease, a compromise immune system and HIV infection, determine from the literature analysis, not con- Coronary artery disease examine a a risk factor in the underlying literature study.
Cerebrovascular disease or apoplexy investigate a a risk factor in the underlying literature study.
Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) examine a a risk factor in the underlying literature study.
Chronic liver disease investigate a a risk factor in the underlying liter -ature study.
BMI be associate a continuous increase in risk.
The literature review Table risk of severe COVID- base on data from GEDA /-EHIS Source: O tableAbout million people in Germany have an increase risk of severe COVID-19; million of these belong to the high-risk group.individuals be and % be men.
% of the population age 15 or over have a strongly increase risk of develop severe COVID-19.
This correspond to mil -lion individual be at high risk in Germany.
Of these, % be and % be risk of develop severe COVID-19 increase steadi- ly age, begin at a young age.
The proportion of people at increase risk be % of 20- to 24-year-olds, % of 45- to 49-year-olds and % of 60- to 64-year-olds.
In contrast, the proportion of people in the high-risk group initially remain at a low level among young and one-in-ten people belong to the high-risk group.
In fact, only % of 60- to 64-year-olds be at high risk.
Therefore, most people be at a high risk due to their advanced age (Figure 1).
Nonetheless, many middle-aged people also be at risk of develop severe COVID-19.
million people in Germany under the age of 60 have an increase risk and million have a strongly increase risk of develop severe COVID-19 (Annex Table 1 ).The data demonstrate a statistically high proportion of men in the group an increase risk of severe COVID-19.
This particularly apply to middle-aged -nounced bet the age of 45 and 49, % of and % of men in this age group deem to be at an increase .2 Risk group by education and household typeClear dirences identid by education level.
Where -as % of people a low level of education in Sensitivity analysisA sensitivity analysis undertake data from the previous GEDA study.
This allo that have be examine in but not in An analysis undertaken use heart failure and cancer a example to determine how the size of the risk group in Germany might change if people these condition include in the group consider to be at disease select because they associate a relative risk >1 of hospitalisation (heart failure) or death (heart failure, cancer) accord to literature .5 Statistical analysisWeighted proportion and extrapolated population num -bers for people an increase or strongly increase risk for severe COVID-19 be depict by age, sex, education, -ues be less than (using a Pearson test for survey sam-ples).
All analysis perform use StataSE (Stata Corp., College Station, TX, USA, 2017).
Results Groups at risk of develop severe COVID-19The result show that % of the population in Germany age 15 or over be at increase risk of develop severe COVID-19.
Extrapolated to the German population, this correspond to about million people.
% of these 70% of people a low level of education and 40% of people a high level of education be at an increase risk of severe COVID-19.total, around million people live alone have an increase risk of develop severe COVID-19.
Neverthe-less, the proportion of the risk group live other fam-ily member be still %.
As such, around million peo-ple an increase risk of develop severe COVID-19 be potentially be expose to an even high risk of infec-tion due to the great level of contact that they have other people in multi-generational household (Table 2 ).
COVID-19The analysis by federal state demonstrate that the popu-lation at risk be distribute unequally throughout Germany.
Germany belong to the risk group, this apply to % of people a medium and % of people a high level of education.
At %, the proportion of people in the high-risk group be more than 25 percentage point high-er among people a low level of education than among people a medium (%) or high level of education (%) (Figure 2).risk status.
Less than one-third of people be not cat-egorised a at risk live alone, almost half of these indi-viduals live a partner or other family members.
The proportion of people live alone rise considerably increase risk: % of people from the risk group live alone; and % of the high-risk group do so.
In Figure Population an increase risk of severe COVID-; share of risk group include the high-risk group by age % of people in the risk group and % of people in the high-risk group live alone.
That is, base on the proportion of the Ger-man population age 15 and old living in Saxony-Anhalt (%), million people be expect to be at an increase risk of develop severe COVID-19.
How-ever, the estimate calculate use data from the GEDA study demonstrate that around mil-lion people be at risk in Saxony-Anhalt.
Similarly, % of the German population living in Bavaria, million people be expect to be at increased risk; (Annex Table 2 ).
Sensitivity analysis increase risk of develop severe COVID-19 be apply plus pre-existing condition such a heart failure and can-cer, the estimate population at risk increase by around 465,000 people.
As such, if the analysis present-ed here have underestimate the size of the risk group, it have do so by probably less than about one million peopleThe proportion of people in the high-risk group be high in Saxony-Anhalt.
The high-risk group be proportionally most strongly represent in Saxony and Thuringia.
The share be lo in Bavaria, Baden-Württemberg and the city state of Berlin and Hamburg.
Generally, the propor -tions be high in the eastern federal state than in the federal state and be particularly low in southern Germany (Figure 3, Annex Table 2 prevalence bet federal state also mean that the Figure Population at increase risk of severe COVID-; share of risk group include the high-risk group by education Table Population in Germany by household type and risk of develop severe COVID- No increased riskRisk groupHigh-risk group Number (millions)Proportion (%)Number (millions)Proportion (%)Number (millions)Proportion (%)Living aloneCouple child Family child (including adult children) Total The large proportion of people a high risk of severe COVID-19 live in eastern Germany and Saarland, both of be rather sparsely populated areas.entral Institute for Statutory Health prevalence among people under 60 than the result pre-sented here.
Ho , neither of these study includ -ed obesity a an important risk factor.
Furthermore, old age be now accept a the main risk factor for develop severe COVID-19, and it not include in these esti-mates a a population-related parameter.
As such, the high -er number of people a at risk in Germany by this study be plausible.
DiscussionIn Germany, million people Œ more than half of the population age 15 or above Œ be at risk of develop severe COVID-19.
Almost one-third Œ million people Œ be at a strongly increase risk.
Only a few attempt have previously be make to quantify the size of these risk group in Germany.
An extrapolation base on claim data from people AOK health insurance find that Figure Population group in Germany at risk of severe COVID- by federal state ciated bias to some extent.
The result present here assume that the measure put in place to contain the COVID-19 pandemic during the study period do not lead to any form of systematic bias.
Ho , a temporary change in the of individual population group to participate in telephone-based survey cannot be com-pletely rule out, even though initial analysis that have compare 2019 and 2020 suggest that this be not the case.
Some important pre-existing condition that be associate a risk of develop severe COVID-19, such a heart failure, dementia or cancer, could not be include , the sensitiv -ity analyse demonstrate that this limitation have have little impact on the size of the risk groups.
They describe the population in need of special protection, should be address targeted measure a a priority, if necessary.
In contrast to previous analysis base on claim data, GEDA also enable social Future research should involve in-depth analysis that focus more closely on combination of social risk factors, since sex, age, education and household composition do not independently determine a person™s risk of develop severe COVID-19.
It be clear, ho , that the risk of devel -oping severe COVID-19 be distribute unequally across society.
A lo level of education be associate not only a high risk of develop severe COVID-19, but also a more frequent tendency to be sceptical about SARS-CoV-2 vaccinations, a a survey by the German Insti -tute for Economic Research sho .
Target group-spe - that Germany have one of the high population-based risk for a severe form of COVID- fact that slightly more than men appear to be at risk can be attribute to their high life expectancy.
The prevalence of an increase risk of develop severe COVID-19 be actually high among middle-aged men than among and men, among other factors, be think to explain the high level of COVID-19 mortality among men .
Men become seriously ill COVID-19 more fre-quently at a young age and be more likely to die than before their sixth decade of life.
As such, the disease burden, calculate in year of life lost, be sig-literature on socioeconomic health inequality in Germany .
In the case of cumulative risks, a in the present The international literature also demonstrate that people a low socioeconomic status be at high risk of severe document for Germany and show, for example, similar pattern for diabetes, high blood pressure, asthma and COPD, high prevalence rate in the eastern German federal state and Saarland [26Œ29].Telephone-based survey be often associate the limitation of lo response rate compare face-to-face surveys.
Ho , this do not necessarily lead to a high level of non-response bias.
In addition, sample compensates for bet the sam -ple and the general population, and, therefore, for the asso-The German version of the article be available at: Data protection and ethicsGEDA be subject to strict compliance the data protection provision set out in the EU General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) and the Federal Data Protection Act (BDSG).
The Ethics Committee of the Charité Œ Universitätsmedizin Berlin assess the ethic of the study and approve the implementation of the study (application number Participation in the study voluntary.
The participant inform about the aim and content of the study and about data protec-tion and provide inform GEDA fund by the Robert Koch Institute and the German Federal Ministry of Health.
C Ackno thanks be due to all those involve make the GEDA study possible through their commit coopera-tion: the intervie from USUMA GmbH, the colleague of the GEDA team at the RKI.
We also like to thank all be suitable for tailor COVID-19 intervention more accurately.
F -ease burden of COVID-19 by sex indicate that men an increase risk even at a young age also constitute a spe-cial target group and should be particularly encourage also be relevant allocate vaccine.
It be also important to bear in mind that mil-lion people at risk live alone.
Among these individual be likely to be many of the million people in need of long-term careand in general many elderly community- d people.
As such, a proportion of these people could possibly be reach more successfully use outreach measure than opt for invitation-based author Dr Alexander RommelRobert Koch Institute Department of Epidemiology and Health MonitoringGeneral-Pape-Str.
Analyses from GEDA Journal of Health Monitoring 6(S2): 2Œ15.
La MP, Brody EM Assessment of Older People: Self-Maintaining and Instrumental Activities of Daily Living.
Lechert Y, Schroedter J, Lüttinger P Die Umsetzung der olkszählung 1970, die Mikrozensus- Zusatzerhebung 1971 und die Mikrozensen 1976Œ2004.
T on hospitalisation, intensive care and mortality due to COVID-19: an umbrella review.
German Health Update: New data for Germany and Europe.
The background to and methodology apply in GEDA Journal of Health Monitoring 2:75Œ82.
Vorerkrankun -gen mit erhöhtem Risiko für sch COVID-19-Verläufe.
Verbrei -tung in der Bevölkerung Deutschlands und seinen Regionen.
Vorerkrankungen mit erhöhtem Risiko für einen sch klinischen Verlauf von COVID-19.
Eine Analyse kleinräumiger ersorgungsatlas- Bericht Zentralinstitut für die kassenärztliche Versor -gung in Deutschland (Zi), Berlin19.
Population vulnerability to COVID-19 inEurope: a burden of disease analysis.
Impact of sex and gender on COVID-19 outcome in Europe.
Kremer HJ, Thurner W Altersabhängigkeit der Todesraten im Zusammenhang mit COVID-19 in Deutschland.
Robert Koch-Institut Täglicher Lagebericht des RKI zur Coronavirus-Krankheit-2019 (COVID-19) .2020.
Die COVID-19- Krankheitslast in Deutschland im Jahr 2020.
Durch Tod und Krankheit verlorene Lebensjahre im Verlauf der Pandemie.
Beschluss und Wissenschaftliche Begründung der Ständigen Impfkommission (STIKO) für die COVID-19-Impfempfehlung.
Lange C, Jentsch F German Health Update (GEDA)-the health interview survey for adult in Germany.
Implementation of the European health interview survey (EHIS) into the German health update (GEDA).
Developments in the health situation in Germany during the initial stage of the COVID-19 pandemic for select indicator of GEDA Journal of Health Monitoring 5:3Œ20.
(As at .2021)9. von der Heyde C Das ADM-Stichprobensystem für Telefon -befragungen.
—Gesundheit in Deutsch-land aktuellﬁ (GEDA Œ Was & Wie.
American Association for Public Opinion Research (AAPOR) 23.
Robert Koch-Institut (Hrsg) Gesundheitliche Ungleichheit in verschiedenen Lebensphasen.
Social inequality and diabetes mellitus Œ development over time among the adult population in Germany.
Socioeco -nomic inequality and COVID-19 Œ A review of the current inter-national literature.
Steppuhn H, Kuhnert R, Scheidt-Nave C 12-month preva-lence of kno chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) in Germany.
12-Month preva-lence of kno diabetes mellitus in Germany.
Steppuhn H, Kuhnert R, Scheidt-Nave C 12-month preva-lence of asthma among adult in Germany.
Neuhauser H, Kuhnert R, Born S 12-Month prevalence of hypertension in Germany.
Groves RM, Peytcheva E The Impact of Nonresponse Rates on Nonresponse Bias: A Meta-Analysis.
Graeber D, Schmidt-Petri C, Schröder C Hohe Impfbereit--vers.
Destatis, WiesbadenRisk groupHigh-risk groupAge group %Number (millions)%Number (millions) T Risk groupHigh-risk group Federal state %Number (millions)%Number (millions)Baden-Württemberg BavariaBerlinBrandenburgBremen HamburgHessenMecklenburg-Western Pomerania Lo SaxonyNordrhein-Westfalen Rhineland-PalatinateSaarlandSaxony Saxony-Anhalt Schles -HolsteinThuringia Annex Table Proportion and extrapolate number of people an increase and high risk of severe COVID- by age Annex Table Proportion and extrapolate number of people an increase and high risk of severe COVID- by federal state
AN EFFECTIVE INTERNATIONAL RESPONSE BY GERMANY TO COVID-19 I.
GUIDING PRINCIPLES OF AN INTERNATIONAL RESPONSE Germany be face major challenge around the due to the COVID-19 pandemic.
It have bring home to u how inter -connected and interdependent be in the globalised .
The pandemic™s impact on health and the result humanitarian and socio-economic consequence now affect all area of life.
International cooperation and coordination be the key to an ef -fective global response to COVID-19 a a to the economic upheaval that be already become evident.
Germany intend to live up to it international responsibility by adopt a compre -hensive and coherent approach.
We have to assume that the number of COVID-19 case around the continue to rise.
Alongside the affected coun -tries in Europe or the United States, COVID-19 have grave conse -quences for country healthcare system and often state structures, a high population density, extreme poverty and citizen underlie health issues, a lack of access to safe drinking a a hunger and malnutrition.
States in con -ict region and people already affect by humanitarian crises, for example internally displaced person or refugees, be espe -cially vulnerable.
Particularly high infection rate and serious consequence for the population and the functioning of the he -althcare system be to be expect in these countries.
Even those emerge economy and develop country hardly affect by the pandemic be likely to experience a crisis due to their depen -dency on the export of raw materials, remittance from abroad, tourism and their integration in international production and supply chains.
We have to be prepare for increased political, eco -nomic and social instability could also have considerable repercussion for Germany and the EU.
Both the EU and by international comparison, Germany be consider to be one of the country , thanks to it good healthcare system, -prepared for the pandemic and re -acted quickly.
The German Government thus believe that it have an obligation to around the to strengthen healthcare system and pandemic resilience.
1JUNE 2020 POLICY PAPER Negative COVID-19 Test ©istock An effective international response by Germany to COVID-19 2That be Germany be active alongside the European Commissi -on and other partner in the multilateral ACT Platform (Access to COVID-19 Tools) in particular.
In implementation of a G20 ple , it have set itself the goal of to the development and fair distribution across the globe of COVID-19 vaccine a a drug and diagnostics for the virus.
The Platform be a key instru -ment for contain the pandemic around the .
Only if the pandemic be bring under control all over the and on a durable basis, and if the effort to overcome it secondary effect be coordinate at multilateral level, can it be defeat for good.
Germany intend to play it part in reach this goal.
FRAMEWORK FOR POLITICAL ACTIONŒ MULTILATERAL, EUROPEAN, BILATERAL The German Government™s international effort to overcome the COVID-19 pandemic take place at three coordinate levels: Ł Multilateral: The German Government use it member -hip of the UN Security Council a a that of other UN organ and the for an approach place the United Nations and other multilateral organisations, especially the World Health Organization (WHO), the International Monetary Fund (IMF) and the World Bank, at the centre of the effort to resolve the current crisis.
The German Government intend to continue fully suppor -ting the WHO, be at the heart of the direct effort to tack -le the pandemic.
It be to greatly strengthen the WHO™s structure and it response capabilitiesŒ politically, institutionally a a nancially.
The German Government actively help to shape a lesson learn process in international pandemic pre -paredness.
At the same time, it place particular importance on preventi -on.
Our goal be to bolster the resilience of state and organisation to future pandemic on a durable basis.
We to highlight the link bet global health and global security a a stability, also in the case of UN peacekeeping measures.
Humanitarian crisis be aggravate by the socio-economic impact of the pandemic.
The German Government be therefore engaged both politically and nancially in the COVID-19 response coordinate by the UN, include the WHO™s Strategic Prepared -ness and Response Plan.
It be focus both on the immediate re -ponse to the pandemic and humanitarian assistance a a on the endeavour to overcome longer-term socio-economic effects.
It be to ensure that aid continue to have access and that the supply chain for relief good be maintain even in the condition result from the pandemic.
Ł European: The COVID-19 pandemic highlight the need for more intensive EU- cooperation and a more prominent role for the EU in the sphere of global health, enhance EU coordina -tion a a strong EU crisis response capabilities, both inter -nally and externally.
This require enhanced situation assessment and forecasting capabilities.
In collaboration the other cur -rent member of the Trio Presidency, the German Government intend to make overcome the pandemic and kick-starting eco -nomic recovery one of the main focus of Germany™s EU Council Presidency.
Within this context, one of our aim be to pur -sue the Franco-German initiative for an EU health strategy a view to foster strategic sovereignty in the healthcare sector.
Among other things, call for the coordination of European procurement policy for future vaccine and treatments.
In the eld of external trade, our main goal be to support our partner in Africa, in particular vulnerable state in the Middle East, a as in the Western Balkans and the country of the Eastern Partnership a they tackle the challenge present by COVID-19.
To this end, the Team Europe approach, .
compre -hensive and joint effort on the part of all EU institution and member states, must be far developed and implement in a coherent and effective manner.
Ł Bilateral: The German Government be carry out national programme enhance those of the European Union and of the United Nations a a those of other international organi -sations.
The main focus of our national programme be Africa, particularly vulnerable state in the Middle East, the Western Bal -kans and the country of the Eastern Partnership.
In the effort to tackle the pandemic, the German Government be also count on NATO, have prove to be a key comple -mentary player in provide support.
Patients from Italy at the Airport ©Peter 3An effective international response by Germany to COVID-19 2III.
THEMATIC CLUSTERS AND INSTRUMENTS The German Government™s international effort take the form of a net approach.
We initially focus on the three priority area be at the heart of the international response to CO -VID-19 and make a major contribution to end the pande -mic and deal it consequences: 1.
Health, include research, development and innovation Support in provide protective equipment, medical supplies, diagnostics, infection control and technical expertise: Taking into account German and European needs, the German Government comply request from other state for a -sistance in the medical sphere, such a for protective clothing, me -dical equipment, testing or advisory services.
In do so, it mainly rely on the instrument of the WHO, the EU, the World Bank and the UN.
Strengthening research, development and production regard vaccines, drug and diagnostics; global distribution and health governance: Only globally coordinate research effort and a distribution of vaccine and drug be global, fair and base on epidemio -logical and other relevant criterion can make a signicant contri -bution to end the pandemic.
In particular, the German Government support the ACT Platform and the key player WHO, the Coalition for Epidemic Preparedness Innovation (CEPI), the Vaccine Alliance (Gavi) and the Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tu -berculosis and Malaria (GFATM).
Expanding global health crisis managementThe German Government intend to call for the WHO™s leading and coordinate role in the global health architecture to be strengthen both nancially and politically: through increase nancial autonomy and the development of robust and durable crisis response capabilities.
Targeted technical cooperation to strengthen healthcare systems: Staaten mit besonders sch Gesundheits- und Ernäh -rungssystemen die Bundesregierung durch bilaterale und multilaterale Instrumente der Ent so dem G7-Biosicherheitsprogramm unterstützen.
Crisis instruments, humanitarian assistance, stabilisation, a a transitional development assistance Humanitarian assistance, transitional development assistance: As the second large donor of humanitarian assistance, the Ger -man Government intend to make it contribution to mee -ting the additional humanitarian need.
In do so, it be gui -ded by the UN™s COVID-19 Global Humanitarian Response Plan (GHRP).
At the same time, it use transitional development assistance to respond to the broad spectrum of consequence of the pandemic in the crisis regions, particularly in the Middle East and in sub-Saharan Africa.
Assistance be provide for African arm force in implement isolation and quarantine measure in conformity human right standard in the form of advisory service and equipment.
Stabilisation of state have be severely affect by COVID-19: Within the EU and the UN, the German Government step up it effort in the eld of stabilisation and security policy.
Above all, the resilience of state in the Sahel of particular relevance to international security should be strengthened.
, include multilateral nancial aid and debt relief measures; foreign trade and investment promotion and trade policy The German Government support multilateral initiative at G7 and G20 level a a those of the World Bank, regional development bank and the IMF.
Easing of the nancial burden on the poor states: The German Government support and be participate in the debt moratorium for the poor state the frame and in the Paris Club.
Germany be advocate that all G20 state take part and that private-sector creditor be included.
Further -more, Germany be contribute to the emergency instrument of the IMF and the World Bank Group.
Sustainable support for section of society and economy hit particularly hard by COVID-19 In an internationally coordinate approach, the German Govern -ment use development cooperation fund to assist section of society hit particularly hard by COVID-19 and to provide targeted assistance to the private sector, especially in the reform partner country of German development cooperation.
In this, the Ger -man Government be guide by the 2030 Agenda and the Paris Agreement.
Foreign trade and investment promotion and trade policy The German Government help German business to continue and set up project and investment in the country affected, a a to take advantage of new opportunity in third markets.
In term of trade policy, it continue to urge the reform of the World Trade Organisation (WTO).
In particular, it call for ini -tiatives to make it easy for develop country to integrate into global trade.
As a complement to this, the German Government to ensure that the EU further expand it ambitious bilateral trade 4agenda.
Our goal be to lessen dependency on individual supplier country through diversication, to maintain (agricultural) sup -ply chain and, at the same time, to foster the integration of part -ner country into trade.
Support and expansion of strong and resource-friendly agricultural and food industry The German Government intend to continue it support measu -res aim at enhance food security in the region of the hit in order to prevent the pandemic resulting in a hunger and food crisis.
REGIONAL FOCUSŒ AFRICA, WESTERN BALKANS, EASTERN PARTNERSHIP, ESPECIALLY VULNERABLE STATES IN THE MIDDLE EAST On epidemiological a a strategic grounds, support for the country of the Western Balkans and in the Eastern Partnership have priority the EU, especially in the short term.
Africa be one of the region around the be least -prepared for the impact of the COVID-19 crisis.
Due to healthcare systems, in many respect vulnerable population and a lack of social security systems, there be a danger that development and humanitarian crisis consequence for security result from the health crisis.
Germany intend to pool it resource they make a si -gnicant difference be also in Germany™s interest.
This apply to African country and to especially vulnerable state in the Midd -le East.
O to the regional and transregional arm conicts, fragile peace processes, terrorism and irregular migration, their destabilisation also have serious consequence for Germany and the EU.
Another focus of Germany™s support be the coun -tries of the Compact Africa and of the African Union, play a key role it come to crisis prevention and stabilisation.
An effective international response by Germany to COVID-19 Meeting of the Federal Government‚s crisis team at the Federal Foreign Office.
THEMATIC CLUSTERS AND INSTRUMENTS Health, include research, development and innovation Support in provide protective equipment, diagnostics, infection control and technical expertise: Taking into account German and European needs, the German Government grant bilateral request for protective equip -ment.
In addition to request something concrete be be offer in return, it give priority to request for assistance from partner Germany have special ties.
Alongside our EU partners, these include especially vulnerable states.
The sooner the assistance be provided, the great it value be in term of health promotion and foreign policy.
The German Go -vernment rely above all on instrument of the WHO, the EU, the United Nations and other multilateral organisation a a other partner such a the Vaccine Alliance (Gavi) and the Glo -bal Fund (GFATM) the frame of the ACT Accelerator.
It make use of bilateral instrument and programme such a the Global Health Protection Programme (GHPP) or the Ger -man Epidemic Preparedness Team (SEEG).
Furthermore, it advocate that the European Early Warning and Response System (EWRS) for communicable disease be expand to include other countriesŒ .
those of the Eastern PartnershipŒ and support the secondment of EU expert to partner countries.
Strengthening research, development and production in relation to vaccines, drug and diagnostics; global distribution and health governance: The promotion of the research, development, production and distribution of vaccines, therapy and diagnostics in connection COVID-19 be key prerequisite for overcome the crisis.
There be a range of national, European and in -ternational focus for research cooperation.
In addition to s development, an adequate level of production a a fair in -ternational access for all state to the product develop must be ensured.
The main focus be on the ACT Platform it key play -ers the WHO, CEPI, Gavi and GFATM.
Only globally coordinate research effort and a distribution of vaccine and drug be global, fair and base on epidemiological and other relevant crite -ria can make a signicant contribution to end the pande -mic.
At the same time, research into prevent zoonotic diseases, also to avert further pandemics, must be strengthen (one health approach).
Expansion of global health crisis management: The German Government be also call for the signicant strengthening of global health crisis management.
It be vital here to strengthen, both nancially and politically, the lead and coordinate role of the WHO in the global health architecture, in particular by ensure great nancial autonomy, the develop -ment of robust and sustainable crisis response capabilities, inclu -ding a fully nanced WHO emergency fund, a a support for other player such a Gavi, the GFATM, the World Organisation for Animal Health (OIE) and the Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) of the United Nations.
Targeted technical cooperation to strengthen healthcare systems: Staaten mit besonders sch Gesundheits- und Ernährungs -systemen durch die Bundesregierung möglich bei de -ren Stärkung unterstützt, et beim Auau von Laborkapazitä -ten und Krankheitsmeldesystemen oder der Land .
Dem dienen bilaterale und multilaterale Instrumente der Ent -lungszusammenarbeit so das Biosicherheitsprogramm der G7.
Crisis instruments, humanitarian assistance, stabilisation, a a transitional development assistance Humanitarian assistance, transitional development assistance: As the second large donor of humanitarian assistance and in light of the increase additional humanitarian need, the Ger -man Government intend to actively to save human life and to alleviate human suffering.
In do so, it be guide by the UN™s COVID-19 Global Humanitarian Response Plan (GHRP) and support UN organisation and humanitarian NGOs a a the organisation of the International Red Cross and Red Crescent Movements.
It also strengthen the relevant coordination me -chanisms, the UN Ofce for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (UN OCHA), the NATO Euro-Atlantic Disaster Response Coordination Centre (EADRCC) and the EU™s Emergency Respon -se Coordination Centre (ERCC).
The German Government support African arm force by provide advice on the implementation of government isola -tion and quarantine measure in conformity human right standards, equipment (medical equipment) and training ( in medical laboratories).
Stabilisation of state have be severely affect by COVID-19: In crisis area such a the Sahel, it can be assume that the impact of the pandemic further the remain minimum level of political stability (in term of security).
The German Go -vernment step up it stabilisation and security engagement, both bilaterally and the EU and UN.
The main goal be to strengthen the resilience of state of particular importance to international security.
Economy, include multilateral nancial aid and debt relief measures; foreign trade and investment promotion and trade policy The German Government support multilateral initiative at G7 and G20 level a a those of the World Bank, regional develop -ment bank and the IMF.
Easing of the nancial burden on the poor states: Germany support and participates in the debt moratorium for the poor state the frame and in the Paris Club.
In the Paris Club and in the G20, the German Government advocate that all G20 take part and that private-sector credi -tors also be included.
Furthermore, Germany be already contribu -ting to the IMF Catastrophe Containment and Relief Trust (CCRT) and support the IMF emergency measure and those of the Wor -ld Bank Group, such a the Pandemic Emergency Financing Fa -cility (PEF).
The German Government be also examine to contribute once more to the Poverty Reduction Gro Trust (PRGT) manage by the IMF, from concessional (emergen -cy) loan be nanced.
Sustainable support for section of society and economy hit particularly hard by COVID-19 The German Government intend to use development cooperati -on fund in an internationally coordinate approach to help sec -tions of society hit especially hard by COVID-19 and to provide targeted assistance to the private sector, especially in Germany™s reform partner countries.
Furthermore, in international organi -sations it be call for the huge effort be need to support economy a a result of the pandemic and to foster the recovery of economy and society to be undertake in the spirit of the 2030 Agenda and the Paris Agreement.
Foreign trade and investment promotion and trade policy Using try and test instrument of foreign trade and inves -tment promotion, the German Government help German business to continue and set up project and investment in the affected countries, especially those of the Compact Africa, a a to take advantage of new opportunity in third markets.
Germany thus help safeguard job at home and abroad, fo -ter economic stability in country hit hardest, a a boost the global ups after the crisis.
In term of trade policy, the COVID-19 crisis have highlight the need to strengthen rules-based trade under the auspex of the WTO, particularly to support member of the internati -onal community and to enhance (market) transparency.
For the alternative be the ﬁlaw of the strongﬂ.
The German Govern -ment continue to urge the reform of the WTO.
In particular, it call for initiative to make it easy for develop country to integrate into global trade.
In addition, health-related initiative can lend fresh momentum to the WTO, such a an open discus -sion on the expansion of the WTO Pharma-Agreement or on an essential health good agreement.
As a complement to this, the German Government to ensure that the EU further expand it ambitious bilateral trade agenda in order to reduce it dependency on individual supplier country through diversication, maintain (agricultural) supply chain and, at the same time, foster the integration of partner country into trade.
A blanket policy on reshoring and re -location have a negative global impact and especial -ly harm develop country at the other end of the supply chain.
Support and expansion of strong and resource-friendly agricultural and food industry With regard to the agricultural and food industries, the German Government intend to continue it support measure aim at enhance food security in the region of the affect in order to effectively prevent the pandemic resulting in a hunger and food crisis.
REGIONAL FOCUSŒ AFRICA, WESTERN BALKANS, EASTERN PARTNERSHIP, ESPECIALLY VULNERABLE STATES IN THE MIDDLE EAST On epidemiological a a strategic grounds, support for the country of the Western Balkans and in the Eastern Partnership have priority the EU, especially in the short term.
For if to succeed in the ght against COVID-19 in Europe, then also need to help combat the virus in our immediate neighbourhood.
It be important that also support effort to adapt migration management on the ground to the COVID-19 situation.
In the Western Balkans and in the country of the Eastern Part -nership, the political investment of more than a decade be at stake.
Africa be among the region in the be least pre -pared to deal the impact of the COVID-19 crisis.
At the same time, it be not possible to assess the situation reliably due to the lack of structure and process for data transfer.
There be a danger that healthcare systems, population be vulnerable in many respect and a lack of social security system turn the health crisis into a development crisis clearly discernible consequence for security policy and far-reaching effect on po -verty and hunger.
Germany therefore continue to stand by the people of Africa and carry on it close cooperation African partner at this difcult time, adapt it to the current challenges, for example the frame of the exist Compact Africa initi -ative.
Strengthening African healthcare systems, the ght against humanitarian crises, in particular against hunger and deal the social and economic consequence of the crisis lie at the centre of the German Government™s engagement.
Annex 6Germany intend to pool it resource they can bring about tangible change be also in Germany™s interest.
Firstly, this apply to African country and to especially vulnerable sta -tes in the Middle East.
Furthermore, their destabilisation in term of regional and transregional arm conicts, fragile peace processes, terrorism and irregular migration also have serious consequence for Germany and the EU.
This also apply to the country of the Compact Africa.
Targeted support must also be give to the African Union, play a key role on the continentŒ especially it come to crisis prevention and stabilisation.
FEDERAL HEALTH REPORTING JOINT SERVICE BY RKI AND DESTATIS Journal of Health MonitoringFEBRUARY SPECIAL ISSUE Care for the chronically ill in Germany Œ The challenge during the COVID-19 pandemic Robert Koch Institute, Berlin Christa Scheidt-Nave, Benjamin Barnes,Ann-Kristin Beyer, Markus A. Busch, Ulfert Hapke, Christin Heidemann,Rebecca Paprott, Henriette Steppuhn,Petra von Berenberg-Gossler, Klaus Kray Robert Koch Institute, Berlin Department of Epidemiology and Health Monitoring CHRONIC DISEASE CARE CARE UPTAKE HEALTH CONSEQUENCES COVID PANDEMIC contain the spread of SARS-CoV-2 infection and pre -vent overburden the health care system, Germany, among other countries, implement a set of non-phar-maceutical intervention (NPI) begin in mid-March 2020.
These included, on the one hand, measure to reduce physical contact and recommendation for social distancing.
On the other hand, adjustment to all ar ea of medical care introduced.
For example, inpatient treatment capacity, especially intensive care capacity for COVID-19 patients, expand and elective (postponable) surgery at all hospital postpone until further of international study suggest that treatment -eases have decrease during the COVID-19 pandemic in many countries, at least temporarily.
Restrictions on the availability of care seem to have play a large a role a have a reluctance of patient to utilize service [3Œ8].
A recent World Health Organiza -tion (WHO) survey of health ministry in 160 countriessho that the extent and duration of health care short -falls be determine to a large extent by type of disease,Care for the chronically ill in Germany Œ The challenge during the COVID-19 pandemicAbstractThe COVID-19 pandemic be pose major challenge to the health care sector.
This scoping review compiles evidence concern change to health care service availability and utilisation a a possible impact on health for select group of chronically ill people in Germany.
The focus be on cancer, cardiovascular diseases, diabetes mellitus and mental disorders.
Most empirical data available concerned inpatient care and sho a clear decline in the utilisation of inpatient treatment in March and April 2020 in the area of oncology and cardiology a a in mental health.
For cardiovascular emergency such a heart attack and stroke, a decline observe especially regard less serious cases.
Although there indication of treatment delays, there no evidence thus far that emergency care have be generally compromise due to adjustment to inpatient care capacities.
In the outpatient setting, extensive adjustment to health care service availability observe for all disease group considered.
In particular, hardly any data available on how change in care impact population health.
There be an urgent need for continuous surveillance and evaluation base on health care and epidemiological for the chronically ill in Germany Œ The challenge during the COVID-19 pandemic central concept and result be prepared.
Research source To identify relevant literature, a search conduct for peer revie publication in the PubMed and COVID-19_MAP literature databases.
To include commentary from stake -holders, grey literature (non-publisher-bound publications) and opinion of experts, an additional key search in Google and Google Scholar and on the of select organisation carry out, and source cit -ed in reference list take into .2 Search strategyOur search cover the period from 1 March to 19 June 2020 (for Google Scholar from 2020 on) a focus on publication pertain to cancer, cardiovascular diseases, diabetes mellitus and mental disorders.
For each of the four subject area considered, the electronic PubMed lit-erature database systematically search four dif -ferent search query in English (the search string use be available on request from the corresponding author).
In order to ensure the great possible congruence in the of combined search term for SARS-CoV-2 and COVID-19.
This core link further combination of search combination of search term use for the addition-al search in Google and Google Scholar and for search-es on the of relevant professional societies, extent of regional SARS-CoV-2 infection and by pre-exist -ing in the capacity of individual countries™ health care system to provide and adapt their article revie change in the health care situation of patient select noncommunicable disease in Ger-many bet the beginning of March and mid-June 2020.
The focus be on cancer, cardiovascular diseases, diabetes mellitus and mental disorders.
All these disease require continuous and quality-assured care, some the frame- of structured disease management program (DMPs).
In addition, study data show that patient dia -betes, cardiovascular disease and some cancer may be at increased risk of develop severe symptom in the course of a COVID-19 infection [10Œ13].
The follo question should be an : How have availability and uti lisation of health care service change for these group of chroni-cally ill people in Germany follo the introduction of NPIs to control the spread of SARS-CoV-2?
On the basis of this review, identify area there be obvious gap in the available evidence and in new question arise that require con-tinued and more in-depth .
review be base on the objective and methodological approach of a scoping review a develop by Arksey and O™Malley.
This form of systematic review serf to gain an overview of the state of kno in complex subject areas.
Once the research question have be formulated, a systematic literature search be carry out and a tabular Care for the chronically ill in Germany Œ The challenge during the COVID-19 pandemic Data preparation and presentation of result essential information extract and tabulate use -tion, responsible stakeholder or institutions, key content and result a a the type of publication docu-mented.
Regarding the type of publication, a distinction make bet empirical study their o data basis and non-empirical study (.
All result of the literature search summarise in t table (Table 1 and Table 2 ), correspond to the t question pose above (changes to health care service availability and uti being).professional association and patient organisations.
The carry out by at least one person per group.
At least t co-authors involve in screen and select the literature search result for each disease group.
Unclear or -sensus reach among the co-authors involved.
Inclusion and exclusion criteriaAll German- and English-language contribution relate to the health care of patient cancer, cardiovascular dis -eases, diabetes mellitus or mental disorder in Germany included.
Contributions that relate exclusively to can -cer screen examination or to person in outpatient home nursing care or long-term residential care Publications on change to the health care of chronically ill person in Germany (search period March to June )(a)Changes to the availability of health care Source: O table Type of publication* and sourceParticipating Cancer International Society of Geriatric Oncology (partner institution in Germany: Heidelberg University Hospital)Changes to the provision of care for old people cancer in ten coun-tries include Germany.
Findings include an increase in telemedicine services, postponement of surgical procedures, infection monitoring, restrict access to care facility for accompany person and visitor Nuclear medicine facilities, international(participating institution in Germany: Albert Lud University Freiburg, Lud Maximilian University Munich, University Hospital Essen)Recommendations and experience change to care in radiation medicine facilities, include organisation (separate care teams), infection monitoring (symptomatic screening), prioritisation of patient progressive disease, suspension of elective study and treatmentsGerman Society for Haematology and Medical Oncology (DGHO)Highlights the special situation of cancer patients, recommendation on, among other things, ensure adequate care, infection monitoring, * empirical studies, .
surveys, analysis of insurance data or inpatient dataContinued on next page Care for the chronically ill in Germany Œ The challenge during the COVID-19 pandemic Type of publication* and sourceParticipating Cancer Cancer Core Europe (CCE) consortium (participating institution in Germany: German Consortium for Translational Cancer Research (DKTK), German Cancer Research Centre (DKFZ), National Center for Tumor Diseases (NCT))Experiences at participate institution in the face of the pandemic and recommendation for adjust care in the centre of the Cancer Core Europe net of hospitals, include organisation, dis -ease management, patient counselling, and researchNuclear medicine institution in Germany, Austria and S (participating institution in Germany: University Hospital Essen, Centre for Radiology and Nuclear Medicine Rhineland)Survey among institution on change to health care condition and in nuclear medicine, include organisa-tion, diagnostics, therapyEuropean Breast Cancer Research Association of Surgi -cal Trialists (EUBREAST) (participating institution in Germany: Charité Œ Universitätsmedizin Berlin; Brust-zentrum Esslingen (BZE))Survey of breast cancer centre , include more than , on the impact on care and adjustment to disease management, include PCR screening before admission, shortening of radiation and systemic therapy, postponement of start of treatmentThoracic Surgery Outcomes Research Net (ThORN) (participating institution in Germany: University of Cologne) Recommendations for prioritise intervention Lud Maximilian University Munich (LMU), Technical University (TU) Munich, Institute for Radia -tion Medicine (IRM) Neuherberg, German Consortium for Translational Cancer Research (DKTK), University Hospital Freiburg, University Hospital Zurich, Medical University InnsbruckRecommendations for radiooncology, include organisation, infection monitoring and hygieneUniversity Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf (UKE) Experiences change to the condition under care be pro-vided and adjustment to care since the start of the pandemic at the UKE, include in the area of outpatient care, inpatient care, clinical research and prioritisation of treatmentMartini-Klinik at the University Medical Center Hamburg- Eppendorf (UKE)Experiences of a prostate cancer centre regard change to care since the start of the pandemic, include occupancy of intensive care beds, screening of patient before surgery* empirical studies, .
surveys, analysis of insurance data or inpatient dataContinued on next page Table Continued Publications on change to the health care of chronically ill person in Germany (search period March to June )(a)Changes to the availability of health care Source: O table Care for the chronically ill in Germany Œ The challenge during the COVID-19 pandemic Type of publication* and sourceParticipating Cardiovascular disease Professional Association of German Neurologists (BDN)Recommendation to reduce physical patient contacts, adaptation of the organisation in the reception area, establishment of telephone and video appointments, relief for medical treatment chain and clinic German Cardiac Society (DGK) Recommendation to limit direct patient contact by make use of telemedicine or to restrict contact to those patient need to be see by a doctorFederal Association of Cardiologists in Private Practice (BNK) -German Society for Neurology (DGN) Call to maintain evidence-based care for patient cerebrovas -cular disease include guideline-based secondary prevention and neurological rehabilitation, report on partial temporary conversion of stroke unit bed into intensive care beds, stroke care in German hospital nonetheless continue to be provide restriction University of Duisburg-Essen, University Hospital Heidelberg, University Medicine of Johannes Gutenberg in Germanyand state level pandemic plan regard structural redistribution number of CPU bedsGerman Cardiac Society (DGK) Plea not to ignore life-threatening heart disease Œ availability of emer-gency care be assuredGerman Cardiac Society (DGK) Assessment that emergency care for patient acute heart disease have be maintainedAlfried Krupp Hospital Essen, Heinrich Heine University Düsseldorf, Ruhr University BochumAssessment that no fundamental restructuring of emergency medical take place, few stroke unit closure due to local outbreaks, rehabili-tative care have be maintainedGerman Society of Neurology (DGN) Information on change to procedure for follow-up rehabilitation to a procedure of direct admission by hospital * empirical studies, .
surveys, analysis of insurance data or inpatient dataContinued on next page Table Continued Publications on change to the health care of chronically ill person in Germany (search period March to June )(a)Changes to the availability of health care Source: O table Care for the chronically ill in Germany Œ The challenge during the COVID-19 pandemic Type of publication* and sourceParticipating Cardiovascular disease Federal Association of Cardiologists in Private Practice (BNK) Report that invasive examination and procedure (.
cardiac catheters, stent implantations) sometimes only carry out after a period of t to three or then schedule at extremely short notice (on the same day), lack of capacity lead to patient be treat at more distant clinics, cardiologist in private practice increasingly take over the outpatient care of patient normally have be monitor a inpatientsDiabetes mellitusFederal Joint Committee (G-BA) Recommendations to suspend compulsory patient training and medical examination in the context of disease management pro-grammes (temporary special arrangement)Practice for paediatric and adolescent medicine, diabeto-logical practice (expert contribution)Description of cutback to routine care to a necessary minimum in child diabetes and their family in direct contact replace by virtual interactive training sessions; individual training and individual consultation in direct contact still possible, subject to compliance hygiene regulations; introduction or expansion of telemedicine service video consultation for child diabetes and their families; relax restriction on a certain number of billable session per patient or for certain patient groupsDiabetological practice (expert contribution)Discussion of perspective on and chance for introduce or expand telemedicine service for adult diabetesT university department for paediatric diabetology, University of Hannover and University of Lisbon (expert contribution) Discussion of perspective on and chance for introduce or expand telemedicine service for child diabetes and their familiesGerman Diabetes Society (DDG)Description of cutback to routine care to a necessary minimum in order -tion of in-person group training for patient diabetes; explanation of possibility and necessary condition for telemedicine servicesGerman Diabetes Society (DDG)C -tient care structure in diabetology, shifting of available capacity up to the closure of diabetes department in hospital to provide care to * empirical studies, .
surveys, analysis of insurance data or inpatient dataContinued on next page Table Continued Publications on change to the health care of chronically ill person in Germany (search period March to June )(a)Changes to the availability of health care Source: O table Care for the chronically ill in Germany Œ The challenge during the COVID-19 pandemic Type of publication* and sourceParticipating Diabetes mellitusPractice for general medicine (expert contribution)Information on the extension of billing option for telemedicine, certain billing code can be reimburse in addition to video appointmentsPractice for general medicine (expert contribution) Information on extend billing option also for patient private health insurance through special regulation in the medical fee schedule (GOÄ)International consortium of expert Information on postpone elective procedures, .
bariatric surgeryGerman Society for Internal Medicine (DGIM)Information on postpone elective procedures, .
kidney trans-plantationsNational Association of Statutory Health Insurance Funds (GKV) Information on option to provide patient medical devices, preferably by mail order, and transmit prescription from medical practice directly to mail order businessesMental disordersCentre for Psychiatric Rehabilitation, University Psychiatric Services Bern; University Hospital for Psychi-atry and Psychotherapy, University of Bern; Department of Health, Bern University of Applied SciencesReport on the impact on mental health care structures, temporary (partial) closure of and services, limited access to (day) clin-ics and limited availability of therapeutic and other contact personsGerman Association for Psychiatry, Psychotherapy and Psychosomatics (DGPPN)Communication by the medical society on the postponement of treat -ment in psychiatric hospital and the replacement of inpatient service outpatient service to ensure care in acute crisis situation National contact and information point for the motiva-tion and support of self-help group (NAKOS)Information on change to available care service in support of self-help group for mentally ill persons, self-help contact point close and only accessible by group meeting or personal exchange not possibleFederal Chamber of Psychotherapists (BPtK) Information on possible s to telephone and video appoint-ments a a online intervention for treatment and therapyFederal Chamber of Psychotherapists (BPtK) Information on the expansion of exist telephone service and the counsel servicesGerman Society for Psychology (DGPs)Opinion from this medical society on the need to allow emergency childcare in day-care centre and school to child and adolescent mental health problem and of mentally ill parent if needed* empirical studies, .
surveys, analysis of insurance data or inpatient dataContinued on next page Table Continued Publications on change to the health care of chronically ill person in Germany (search period March to June )(a)Changes to the availability of health care Source: O table Care for the chronically ill in Germany Œ The challenge during the COVID-19 pandemic Type of publication* and sourceParticipating Cancer Analysis of insurance data regard change in the number of treat- decrease by % respectively, for other diagnosis (including breast cancer and pro -Cancer Core Europe (CCE) consortium (participating institution in Germany: German Consortium for Translational Cancer Research (DKTK), German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), National Center for Tumor Diseases (NCT))Discussion of the decline number of cancer patient admit to European cancer centre the Cancer Core Europe net , volumeNuclear medicine institution in Germany, Austria and S (participating institution in Germany: University Hospital Essen, Centre for Radiology and Nuclear Medicine Rhineland)Survey of institution on the decrease in the proportion of outpa-tients; no decrease in the treatment of malignant neoplasmsEuropean Breast Cancer Research Association of Surgical Trialists (EUBREAST) (participating institution in Ger -many: Charité Œ Universitätsmedizin Berlin; Brustzen-trum Esslingen (BZE))Survey of breast cancer centre , include more than neoadjuvant treatment (treatment to reduce the size of a tumour before surgery)Martini-Klinik at the University Medical Center Hamburg- Eppendorf (UKE)Discussion of experience of the clinic regard the cancellation of operation by patient and the clinic, temporary slight decrease in admissionsCardiovascular disease Institutes of nuclear medicine in Germany, Austria and S (participating institute in Germany: University Hospital Essen, Centre for Radiology and Nuclear Medicine Rhineland)Survey in hospital and practice sho a decrease in the number of outpatient myocardial scintigraphies carry out, great German Cardiac Society (DGK) * empirical studies, .
surveys, analysis of insurance data or inpatient dataContinued on next page Table Continued Publications on change to the health care of chronically ill person in Germany (search period March to June )(b)Changes to health care service uti lisation Source: O table Care for the chronically ill in Germany Œ The challenge during the COVID-19 pandemic Type of publication* and sourceParticipating Cardiovascular disease Analysis of health insurance data sho a decline in inpatient treat- DAK-Gesundheit statutory health insurer-Hamburg Asklepios hospital decline in hospitalisation for heart attack bet the end of University Hospital UlmAnalysis of inpatient data sho a decrease in heart attack attack ECG change (STEMI), unstable angina pectoris, cardiac arrhythmia and preclinical cardiac arrestHelios hospitalsAnalysis of inpatient data from select hospital sho a % to -University of Mannheim, University Hospital Erlangen, University Hospital Dresden, University of Freiburg Ruhr Neurovascular Net (NVNR)Analysis of inpatient data from select hospital sho a decrease in emergency room visit due to TIA and mild stroke in the early phase of the pandemic, in some centre a decrease in stroke treat-ments reperfusion therapyAlfried Krupp Hospital Essen decrease due to ischaemic haemorrhages* empirical studies, .
surveys, analysis of insurance data or inpatient dataContinued on next page Table Continued Publications on change to the health care of chronically ill person in Germany (search period March to June )(b)Changes to health care service uti lisation Source: O table Care for the chronically ill in Germany Œ The challenge during the COVID-19 pandemic Type of publication* and sourceParticipating Cardiovascular disease Charité Œ Universitätsmedizin BerlinAnalysis of inpatient data sho a decline in inpatient acute treat-ments for neurovascular emergency and chronic subdural haemato -ma NDR enquiry to association of statutory health insurance physician and dentist and professional associationspractices in the early phase of the pandemicGerman Heart Foundation (DHS) Information on potentially anxious patient stop take heart medication such a ACE inhibitor and Sartane German Cardiac Society (DGK) and German Heart Foundation (DHS) Call for people to seek immediate medical care in the event of typical symptom such a heart pain, shortness of breath or tightness in the chest areaGerman Society of Neurology (DGN) Call for people to seek immediate medical care in case of typical stroke symptomsDiabetes mellitusGerman Diabetes Society (DDG)Communication from the medical society on decline patient number in practices, outpatient clinic and emergency room Association of Statutory Health Insurance Physicians of Bavaria (KVB)Discussion on the decline in uti lisation of practice service on the basis of bill data from Bavarian practices, particularly among specialist (depending on the speciality German Diabetes Society (DDG)Recommendations of the medical society for diabetes management a a for closely monitor care, possible by tele-phone or telemedicine; recommendation for the use of diabetes International consortium of expertsRecommendations of the expert consortium for the screening of all -- recommendation to intensively monitor people medication to insulin treatment Postponement of elective proce-dures, .
surveys, analysis of insurance data or inpatient dataContinued on next page Table Continued Publications on change to the health care of chronically ill person in Germany (search period March to June )(b)Changes to health care service uti lisation Source: O table Care for the chronically ill in Germany Œ The challenge during the COVID-19 pandemic Type of publication* and sourceParticipating Mental disordersUniversity of MannheimAnalysis of data from the Central Institute of Mental Health on the decrease in uptake compare to the same period last year-sions for mental and behavioural disordersGerman Association for Psychiatry, Psychotherapy and Psychosomatics (DGPPN)Communication from the medical society on the increase in the number of patient from inpatient and semi-residential care in outpatient clinics* empirical studies, .
surveys, analysis of insurance data or inpatient dataType of publication* and sourceParticipating Cancer International Society of Geriatric Oncology (participating institution in Germany: Heidelberg University Hospital)Discussion of burden cause by access restriction for accompany and visit person at health care facilitiesCancer Core Europe (CCE) consortium (participating institution in Germany: German Consortium for Translational Cancer Research (DKTK), German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), National Center for Tumor Diseases (NCT))Discussion of cause of concern and uncertainty among cancer due to immunosuppression, restriction in health care availability; there be a strong demand for counsel service (.
the Cancer Information Service)German Cancer Society (Working Group Prevention and Integrative Oncology (PRiO))restrictions (especially contact restrictions) and about restric-tions to necessary therapy negative consequence for health; doctor fear long-term mental or physical consequence for them-selves, report increase time need for consultation; patient be a of doctors™ heavy * empirical studies, .
surveys, analysis of insurance data or inpatient dataTable to the care of the chronically ill in Germany (search period March to June )Source: O table Continued on next page Table Continued Publications on change to the health care of chronically ill person in Germany (search period March to June )(b)Changes to health care service uti lisation Source: O table Care for the chronically ill in Germany Œ The challenge during the COVID-19 pandemic Type of publication* and sourceParticipating Cardiovascular disease Federal Association of Cardiologists in Private Practice (BNK)Report that cardiology patient have recently cancel appoint-ments now be register a emergency casesUniversity of UlmAnalysis of inpatient data sho an increase in the average concen-tration of high-sensitivity TnT (hs-TnT) in heart attack patient German Cardiac Society (DGK) Report on an increase in the number of patient complication typically relate to untreated heart attacksCharité Œ Universitätsmedizin BerlinAnalysis of inpatient data sho that the proportion of chronic sub-dural haematoma patient more severe symptom at admission in hospitalDiabetes mellitusGerman Diabetes Society (DDG)Communication from the professional association on the risk of stigmatisation of diabetes patient through exclusion from , in school and in publicdiabetesDE Œ German Diabetes AidCommunication from the organisation on the concern felt by diabetes patient sick leave have an acute illness; concern about a lack of diabetes medicationInstitute for Work and Technology, Westphalian University of Applied Sciences Gelsenkirchen, Bocholt, Reckling-hausenPress release on the fear of people diabetes of be infect diabetesDE Œ German Diabetes AidPress release on the uncertainty of people insulin-treated diabetes, in particular in relation to the use of continuous glucose monitoring system and insulin pump * empirical studies, .
surveys, analysis of insurance data or inpatient dataTable Continued to the care of the chronically ill in Germany (search period March to June )Source: O table Care for the chronically ill in Germany Œ The challenge during the COVID-19 pandemic treatment plan under consideration of the individual sit-uation.
For example, the use of less toxic chemotherapeu -tic agent suggest and, if possible, avoid infu-sions in favour of orally administer drugs.
In the ld of radiotherapy, distribute the required radiation dose over fe appointment discuss a an option to reduce the number of contact and to achieve a shorter treatment patient cardiovascular diseases, the pandemic- related adjustment also lead to restructuring of inpatient care capacities.
For example, hospital bed in dedicate for patient acute stroke (stroke units) or acute chest pain (chest pain units) partly convert into intensive care beds.
According to the medical societies, ho , the care of patient cardiovascular disease could still be fully assure [26Œ28].
In addition, by simplify approval procedure for rehabilitative follow-up treatment, transfer to rehabilitation clinic acceler-ated.
Ho , medical professional association have report that invasive examination and procedure (.
cardiac catheterisation and stent implantation) sometimes only carry out after a t - to three- period and that an increase number of patient have to visit more distant clinics.
Moreover, cardiolo -gists in private practice increasingly take over treatment of patient other have be admit a inpatient for observation.
According to the German Society of Cardiology (DGK), the call to postpone elective operation carry out overall, include the number of more urgent elective operation that should normally have be carry out 30 .ResultsThis review cover a total of 62 publication highly uneven number and type of publication for each ques-tion and disease area (Table 1 and Table 2 ).
A total of 40 publication exclusively via the additional internet-based search.
The remain 22 source (includ-ing all source on cancer, 7 of 24 source on cardiovascu -lar diseases, 2 of 18 on diabetes, and 2 of 9 on mental dis-orders) found via PubMed.
An additional report by -ly after the end of the search period, nonetheless included, since preliminary result of this analysis have be publish in advance during the period cover by the .1 Changes to health care availabilityIn all disease group considered, major adjustment to health care availability have take place ( Table 1 ).
A distinction must be make bet , on the one hand, change to the regula-tory frame , such a billing modalities, and, on the other hand, recommendation by medical societies.
In the area of oncology, guideline prioritise the urgency of surgical cancer treatment implement (Table 1 ) in order to ensure that necessary operation could be carry out promptly even intensive care resource become limited.
T health care set and reduce the risk of infection for can-cer patients, it recommend that treatment be car-ried out in specialised oncological facility possible .
Further recommendation involve modify Care for the chronically ill in Germany Œ The challenge during the COVID-19 pandemic crisis intervention.
For the treatment of physical diseases, follow-up care and check-up appointment a a tumour conference have be conduct use telemed -icine approaches.
These change also make possible by expand billing option to include telemedicine and video consultations.
Certain certed video service provider could also be use free of charge in In psychiatry, new service such a telepsychiatric cri -sis services, special crisis hotlines or other local service set up.
Changes in care provision and utilisation The number of hospital admission of cancer patient insure by the statutory AOK health insurance decrease of April 2020 (calendar 12 to 14) compare to the same period in the previous year (Table 1 for oncological operation mixed: for some cancer diagnose (especially colorectal and lung cancers) the num-ber of primary operation fell by around 20%, for increase (breast and cervical cancers) recorded.
The number of second operation (breast and colorectal can -cers) fell by more than 70%.
A survey of nuclear med-icine department and practices, mainly from Germany, concern cancer and cardiovascular diagnostic and ther-apeutic procedure also sho a decline in tumour diag-nostic procedure of bet 14% and 58% (depending on examination type).
In contrast, radiation therapy for malignant tumour have remain stable.
For car -diovascular diseases, the same study sho an overall Routine diabetes care also curtail to provide capacity for COVID-19 patients, include the post-ponement of elective surgical procedure (.
In addition, the change make by the Federal Joint Committee (G-BA) to the DMP requirement guideline particularly impor - or diabetes.
To avoid SARS-CoV-2 infections, patient train -ing sessions, be normally compulsory part of the DMP and be usually carry out in a group setting, a a the documentation of medical examination by a doctor, .
In order to ensure that people diabetes continue to receive training, video training consider a viable option [32, 38Œ41] some health insurance reimburs-ing such services.
Individual training and consul-tations remain possible, subject to compliance hygiene admission to psychiatric (day) clinic or reha -bilitation facility restrict and appointment for treatment postponed.
In order to protect mental health care availability for people experience acute crises, inpa -tient service replace by outpatient services.
Out-reach service and treatment make available to peo-ple in need of a high level of support to cope in their daily -Medical society and professional association recom-mended expand telemedicine service for patient and establish video consultation hour [20, 45Œ48].
Regard -ing mental health, for example, these recommendation impact both regular psychotherapeutic treatment and The number of inpatient treatment for people cancer, cardiovascular disease and mental disorder fell sharply in 2020 in Germany compare to the same period in the previous year.
Care for the chronically ill in Germany Œ The challenge during the COVID-19 pandemic Furthermore, the association of statutory health insur -ance physician and professional association have report a reduction in the number of consultation in oncology and cardiology practices, similar develop-ments be report in the area of endocrinology and diabetology [32, 33, 58Œ62].
Many professional society a a patient organisation urge patient not to neglect the treatment of their chronic disease for fear of infection and, for example, to schedule and attend follow-up and treatment appointments.
There also against independently discontinue medication such a ACE inhibitors, be use to treat high blood pressure and for a suspect of increase the risk of a severe course of COVID- WIdO institute™s analysis of AOK insurance data sho a 49% decrease in inpatient treatment for mental and behavioural disorder during the stricter phase of the lockdo compare to the previous year.
The Central Institute of Mental Health in Mannheim record a 27% decrease in the use of it emergency service for people mental health issues, particularly for aective disorder .
Ho , the German Association for Psychiatry, Psy -chotherapy and Psychosomatics (DGPPN) report that the 450 psychiatric outpatient clinic in Germany observe an increase in the number of patient from residential and semiresidential care .3 Changes to health care service and their impact on health So far, very little empirical data exist concern the impact on health due to the observe change to health care decrease in myocardial scintigraphy in outpatients, a more pronounced trend for hospital compare to radio-logical practices.
Analyses of AOK insurance data sho a signicant decrease in hospital admission for acute ischemic stroke, myocardial infarction or heart failure in 2020 compare to the corresponding period in the previous year .
In a more in-depth analysis, this decrease particu-larly mark for mild case of heart attack and stroke.
The same apply to the admission of patient an abdominal aortic aneurysm.
In concordance these results, decrease in inpatient treatment for heart attack and in acute treatment for heart failure and arrhythmia report for the early phase of the pandemic base on data from a second statutory health insurance company (the Deutsche Angestellten Krankenkasse, DAK) and t hospital net [52Œ54].
One university hospital in south- to minor acute heart attack Œ those change in the ECG typical of an infarction (NSTEMI) Œ in 2020 than during the same period in 2017, 2018 and 2019.
The number of admission due to more severe acute myo-cardial infarction ECG change typical of an infarction (STEMI) do not change, ho .
Consistently fe emer -gency treatment than in previous year also observe for patient minor stroke or transient ischaemic attack (TIA).
This be sho by analysis of data from 36 regional stroke centre in the Ruhr areaand from several stroke unit at university hospitals, a a from the Alfried Krupp Hospital in Essen.
In addition, a decline in neu-rovascular emergency also observe at the Charité Berlin during the early phase of the pandemic.
There no indication that emergency care for stroke and heart attack have be comprise by adjustment to inpatient care capacity in Germany.
Care for the chronically ill in Germany Œ The challenge during the COVID-19 pandemic high-sensitivity troponin T (hsTnT) measure than in previous years, may indicate a delayed onset of therapy.
The Charité hospital in Berlin also find indi-cations of delayed treatment for patient chronic sub-dural haematoma (collection of blood bet the outer cover of the brain (dura mater) and the brain).
For example, patient admit during the early stage of the pandemic sho more severe symptom and a prognosis in the hospital setting.
Patients diabetes that they severer course of COVID-19 and that they might be infect SARS-CoV-2 during a doctor™s appointment.
Patients afraid of shortage in diabetes medication and report problem the contact-free transmis -sion of therapy data to their diabetology practice and uncer-tainty about how to adjust insulin requirement underchanging everyday conditions.
The risk of stigmatisingpeople diabetes a a COVID-19 risk group by exclud-ing them from public life also .DiscussionOur research on the change to the health care situation for people select noncommunicable disease in -ic only a few empirical study that almost exclusively related to inpatient care.
The analysis of AOK- insurance data sho a clear decline in inpatient admis-sions for oncology in 2020.
Other Euro-pean country have report similar decline in hospital service availability and uti lisation.
Instead there be pre-dominantly opinion on the feared consequence of delayed diagnosis and therapy, a a result from survey of patient and doctor (Table 2 ).
Cancer patient often express concern about poten -tially inadequate or delay treatment.
The possibility of of COVID-19 due to cancer or therapy-related immunosup-pression have also cause uncertainty.
Access restriction for visitor and accompany person of patient in inpatient and outpatient care consider a burden.
In oncological clinical research, there concern about delay in recruitment of patient to ongoing clinical therapy trials.
These play an impor -tant role in provide care to people rare cancer in particular.
A task force form by the German Cancer Aid, the German Cancer Society and the German Cancer Research Centre (DKFZ) of a ‚ ™ of oncological treatment a a result of the lockdo and change make necessary by the to Germany™s Association of Cardiologists in Private Practice (BNK), some cardiology patient can -celled appointment later treat a emergencies.
Furthermore, the German Cardiac Society have also report an increase in the incidence of complication typical of untreated heart attacks.
Based on data from the Uni-versity Hospital of Ulm, the blood value of heart attack patients, can provide information about the extent of the organ damage caused, during the early stage of the pandemic compare those from the correspond-ing period in the year 2017 to 2019.
It find that in the current year higher average concentration of Care for the chronically ill in Germany Œ The challenge during the COVID-19 pandemic Moreover period discuss outpatient care.
According to report from the National Association of Statutory Health Insur -ance Physicians (KBV), fe appointment in oncological and cardiological practice make dur -ing the early stage of the pandemic.
An analysis by the Central Research Institute of Ambulatory Health Care publish outside the review period.
According to this anal--rological, endocrinological, psychiatric and psychothera -peutic practice fell in the course of March 2020 by up to 40% in the last of March compare to the same period in the previous year.
-tive or qualitative study on the reason for a delayed uti-lisation of inpatient or emergency medical treatment in Germany.
We also unable to identify any popula -tion-based quantitative or qualitative study that report and outpatient appointment do not take place (.
they cancel or postponed, either by the doctor™s practice due to lack of capacity or by the patient themselves).
This question require further that (partial) closure of and limited admission to hospi-tals have to be compensate by outpatient services, for exam-ple in outpatient cardiologyand psychotherapy.
Results from ongoing research project monitor outpa-tient care since March 2020, such a COVI-Prim (Accom-panying Monitoring of Primary Care in General Practition -ers™ Practices during the COVID-19 Pandemic), be important for gain a deep insight into the complex admission and register cancer diagnosis since mid- February.
For cardiovascular diseases, in line international report [5, 6, 74, 76Œ78], both AOK data and data from cardiological and neurological clinical department indicate a decline in the number of patient receive emergency medical or acute diagnostic care in the same period compare to the previous year.
This associate primarily a decrease in the number of mild heart attack and stroke a a transient ischae-mic attacks.
According to an analysis of data from 36 emer-gency department in Germany, a sharp decrease like observe in less urgent compare to more urgent emergency treatment follo implementation of lock-do conjunction some evidence from international studies, this pattern can be interpret a indicate a sub-stantial role of patient reduce or delay uti lisation of health care service [18, 26, 55Œ57].
An expert report on the committee conclude that a patient™s decision to go ahead treatment or not have play a great role in explain--pared to the same period last year than hospital cancel -ling treatment.
For example, in the period from January to May 2020, the proportion of emergency hospital admis-non-emergency admissions, and the number of less urgent treatment decrease more than more urgent ones.
Ho for Germany indicate a delayed uti lisation of medical care for heart attack and chronic subdural haematoma.
A decrease in hospital admission for stroke, heart attack and other cardiovascular emergency have be presume to be associate delayed uti lisation of available for the chronically ill in Germany Œ The challenge during the COVID-19 pandemic not lead to critical bottleneck in oncological care in Ger-many, and the system have overall be perceive a be relatively adaptable.
Probably only a small number of time-critical therapy postponed.
In contrast to Euro -pean region high COVID-19 case numbers, no fun-damental restructuring of emergency care for stroke patient in Germany have so far appear to have occurred.
According to the medical societies, the timely diagno-sis and treatment of patient acute cardiovascular event have at no time be at risk.
Despite the closure of diabetes unit a part of the adaptation of inpa-tient care capacity in the context of the pandemic , it have be assume for the time be that the care of diabetes patient could be largely maintained, at least in paediatrics.
The health care situation for peo-ple mental disorder cannot yet be fully assessed.
The key question a to the extent to patient a a result of pandemic-related change to health care availability and reduction in uti lisation cannot be an at present.
Our review only t empirical study that find suggestive evidence of delayed uti -lisation follo by great disease severity in patient heart attack and elderly people chronic subdural cannot rule out that delay in diagnostic assessment and follow-up appointments, also due to change in the uti-lisation pattern of patients, have lead to a shift of diagnosis to later disease stages.
Such a shift could lead to poorer treatment outcome increase in acute complication or longer-term sequelae.
For example, an article publish after the literature review requirement that outpatient care provider have to meet, especially in the early stage of the analysis of the development of health care availability and uti of chronically ill person be important, especially if a new spike in case to develop in the course of the pan-demic.
For example, professional society in the oncology began, at an early stage, to develop a range of recommendation to adapt procedure in order to avoid interruption to diagnostic and therapeutic measure that cannot be postpone minimise the risk of infection.
One potential problem that a backlog of patient could still develop, partly because old patient in particular may have avoid the health care system, despite symptoms, and thus not have receive prompt diagnostics and treat-ment.
Temporary suspension (mammography screening) or reduce uti lisation of cancer screen exam-inations could also contribute to this.
Encouraged by recommendation from medical socie-ties and association a a new bill options, tele-medical care service for patient chronic physical illness and mental disorder expanded.
There be great potential for further development of these option beyond the end of the current pandemic.
Further analysis be require to determine the extent to these service be accept and use by medical profes -sionals and patients.
Such analysis should identify barrier to uti and expertise as a the inherent limit of such service .
According to the result of surveys, expert assessment Decreasing outpatient treatment for cancer, cardiovascular disease and diabetes mellitus could have be due to change in availability and uti lisation of health care for the chronically ill in Germany Œ The challenge during the COVID-19 pandemic change to health care availability and uti lisation relat -ed to the pandemic be particularly relevant.
The most impor-tant limitation be that gap remain in the review; for example, unpublished results, ongoing or in publication not systematically research by contact the rele-vant institutions.
Similarly, a a scoping review, only a cate -gorisation accord to type and content of cited source -ity.
Our search only cover the period bet March and June 2020, meaning that result publish outside the search period could not be include in the systematic over-view, even if they refer to the period bet the beginning of March and mid-June 2020.
Conclusions In summary, during the early stage of the COVID-19 pan -demic the number of people treat for cancer, cardiovas -cular diseases, diabetes mellitus and mental disorder decrease in Germany.
In order to learn from this for future crises, the role play by change to health care availabil-ity and decline in uti -tion.
In order to make necessary adjustment quickly, it be important to continue monitor the health care situ-ation throughout the ongoing course of the pandemic.
Only a targeted monitoring of the development in outpatient and inpatient care can shed light on adverse and possibly long-term consequence for patient™s health and -be-ing due to change in the health care situation.
At the pop-ulation level, the close monitoring of the development of morbidity and mortality require a relia -ble, timely and continuously available data sho that the frequency of diabetic ketoacidoses in child and adolescent ne diagnose type 1 diabetes high during the early stage of the pandemic than in the comparable period of previous years, could be due to a delay in diagnosis.
As a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, expert expect an increase in mental disorder such a adjustment disorders, anxiety disorders, depression and trauma disordersto the health care system have to respond in the long term.
Based on past experiences, the German Association for Psychia-try, Psychotherapy and Psychosomatics also point out that increase suicide rate must be anticipated, especially if the economic do cause by the pandemic contin-ues to .In summary, these result show a considerable need for research both on the cause and the consequence of change to the availability and uti lisation of health care service by chronically ill people in Germany.
Strengths and limitationsOne of the strength of the present review be that it include not only a structure search in PubMed but also additional search via the search engines Google and Google Scholar a a the of select organisations.
FEDERAL HEALTH REPORTING JOINT SERVICE BY RKI AND DESTATIS Journal of Health MonitoringOlder people at the beginning of the COVID-19 pandemic: A scoping revie SPECIAL ISSUE Older people at the beginning of the COVID-19 pandemic: A scoping revie scoping review focus on evidence gap regard the on health, social participation and life context of old people at the beginning of the COVID-19 pandemic.
It be base on a systematic search strategy of the international literature cover a period bet December 2019 and June 2020.
The review be supplement by a search of the publication (empirical study, review, discussion paper).
The content summarise in tabular form accord to on physical and mental health, physical and cognitive function and participation in society.
Social isolation, loneliness, opportunity, for raise public a of the need of old people in various life contexts.
Publications point to the urgent need for research into the biological and social cause of old peoples™ high infection risk and how measure nurse care).
COVID PANDEMIC SARSCOV OLDER PEOPLE SCOPING REVIEW 1.
IntroductionPeople age 60 year and old and, in particular, men age 80 year and old or pre-existing medical con-ditions be consider the main risk group for a severe or fatal Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19); men be generally consider to be at great risk than [1Œ4].
As a vaccine medication to treat COVID-19 not available the pandemic break out, non- pharmaceutical intervention key to contain the spread of SARS-CoV-2 and prevent the health system from become over .
As early a March 2020, a number of measure to limit physical contact bet European countries, include recommendation or regu-lations instruct those respiratory symptom to self-isolate, closure of schools, kindergarten and care facilities, and -ranging restriction on movement and Robert Koch Institute, Berlin Beate Gaertner , Judith Fuchs ,Ralph Möhler, Gabriele Meyer,Christa Scheidt-Nave Robert Koch Institute, Berlin Department of Epidemiology and Health Monitoring Heinrich Heine University Düsseldorf, Institute for Health Services Research and Health Economics Bielefeld University, School of Public Health, Department of Health Services Research and Nursing Science Martin Luther University Halle-Wittenberg, Institute for Health and Nursing Science Robert Koch Institute, Berlin Department of Epidemiology and Health Monitoring include the follo steps: search for and identify relevant studies, study selection, chart the data, collat-ing, summarising and report the January 2020, the library team at the Robert Koch Institute (RKI) have conduct a continuous search of the international literature on the COVID-19 pandemic in the PubMed and Embase databases.
For the database search -es, t complex of search term create and link to identify relevant literature.
New term continuous-ly add to both complex a need (for example, ‚SARS- CoV-2™ add to the complex of term relate to the virus the initially nameless virus name ‚Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus 2™).
In addition, the team also search the follo preprint servers: arXiv, ChemRxiv, and Social Science Research Net (SSRN).
Annex Table 2 sho the search term use here.
2019 be archive together their citation in the refer-ence manager EndNote and have be make available to Figure 1).
The systematic search for this scoping review base on publication up to 16 June 2020.
At this time, four separate literature archive the iden--able (Figure 1 not initially be transfer to a single database.
Therefore, by mean of a search in EndNote (key ‚aged™ or text ‚aged™, ‚elder *™ or ‚older adult *™ in all citation focus on the target group of old people travel, even involve the enforcement of curfe .
To protect their elderly populations, Germany and other coun-tries issue recommendation for visit to and contact resident of long-term care facilities.
In addition, the pandemic make it increasingly dicult to maintain regular outpatient medical care a a nursing care in the community and in long-term care facility [7Œ10].
Against this background, it be to be expect that the COVID-19 pandemic have and have a variety of conse-quences for the health and -being of old people.
The conceptual frame for this in the population age 65 and over.
Based on the World Health Organization (WHO) Action Plan on Ageing These are: personal factor (physical and mental health, phys-ical and cognitive functioning, health behaviour), activities/ participation and environmental factor (health care, nurs-ing care, physical and social environment).
On this basis, also aim to identify the area obvious evidence gap exist and to highlight issue that require more in-depth analysis in the .
MethodologyTo gain a broad overview, a ‚scoping review™ conduct -ed base on the frame by Arksey and O™Malley Archived publication n= Archived publication n= Archived publication n= Archived publication Publications excluded, reason no focus on old peopleExcludedPublications excluded, reason ExcludedC Publications from PubMed and Embase Publications on arXiv, ChemRxiv, and SSRN preprint server n= Full-text screening Publications includedn= n= Publications excluded, reason not relate to SARS-C no focus on old people not publish in either English or German study protocol drug studyExclusion of duplicate = C = Robert Koch Institute, SARS-C = Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome C SSRN = Social Science Research Net Flow chart for systematic publication selection Source: O diagramCollating, summarising and report the result The collated and summarised result present in tabular form.
The result of the literature search in inter-national database (Table 1 ) and the result of the internet search on the of select organisation in Ger-many analyse separately (Table 2 ).
To increase read -ability and avoid redundancy the result table, the summary of the result be present below refer- from the international systematic literature search sort base on topic, methodology and main results.
In addition, all include publication catego-rised accord to publication type (discussion paper, review or empirical study) and the publication™s country of Since the scoping review aim to provide a summary of exist kno , the next step to cate -gorise the main content describe in the individual publi-cations and assign them to the corresponding topic area -ing scientic frame concept.
For theeld of action ‚participation and activities™, for example, nine paper discuss ‚Physical activity in the context of con-tact and movement restrictions™ and the result of the paper (or the line of argument in discussion papers) all refer to a reduction in physical activity level follo the implementation of social distancing measures.
The tabulated summary of the result provide the publication sort by content category.
Like , the total number of publication and the proportion of empirical publication be sho by content category action (Table 1 ).
The author then transfer hit from the four archive into a single literature database in EndNote and remove duplicate use an automatic procedure.
In this litera-ture database, separate search carry out for the participation and environmental factors) (Annex Table 3 ).
All citation identied in this screened inde - abstract checked, follo by the full text of the remain relevant hits.
Disagreements on to include a publication resolve through discussion or by involve other member of the review team.
For this t -stage review, the follo exclusion criterion have oV-2 or COVID-19, no focus on old people, not publish in English or German, unrelated to one of the three drug study.
In addition, the of preselected German organisation (.
professional societies, self-help organisation or research net ) search for publication relate to the health of old people in con-nection COVID-19 release up to and include 29 June 2020.
A total of 14 organisation select due Annex Table 4 contain a list of these organisations.
Here too, relevant publication select independently by t criteria. ten from China, ten from Italy, ten from the United Kingdom, eight from Canada, seven from Spain, four from Australia, four from Brazil, t from Bangladesh, t from Belgium, t from France, t from Ireland, t from Israel, t from Nor , t from Tai and one publi -cation each from Chile, Ghana, Japan, the Philippines, Thailand, Turkey, Hungary and 1 together the associate literature.
The aim of this scoping review not provide a detailed analysis of the of action ‚Personal factors™ These include 37 discussion paper, t revie and 38 empirical study.
For physical health, some paper sub - COVID-19 and highlight that biological rather than chron -ological age should be use to assess a person™s risk of suf-Statements retrieve from selected German organisa-tions list separately (Table 2 ) title, reference and responsible organisation; the central topic describe use key .3.
Results Search resultBy 16 June 2020, a total of 50,108 publication on SARS-CoV-2 infection or COVID-19 have be archive in four separate literature databases at the RKI (Figure 1).
Of these, 47,879 publication exclude via search query in End-Note a they not focus on old people.
Of the remain 2,229 publications, 379 duplicate exclud-ed use an automate procedure.
The remain 1,850 publication form the basis of the systematic research.
The initial search for theelds of action in the literature database use EndNote result in a total of 1,068 hit lead to the exclusion of 852 publications; the full text of 216 publication check for inclusion.
A total of 149 publication include for this paper.
Of these, 95 discussion paper, four revie and 50 empirical study.
A total of 77 factors™, 71 for ‚environmental factors™ and 26 for ‚partici -pation and activity™.
Some publication relevant for The 149 publication come from the follo 26 coun-tries: 52 from the USA, Sociodemographic factor older person™s risk of COVID-19.of old age could amplify this.
On the other hand, a major-ity of old people report good mental health, especially compare to young adults, in the early stage of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Ho , those old people more symptom of anxiety and depression; this also the case for those chronic conditions.
In the ‚physical functioning™ domain, it be assume that physical inactivity due to frequent sit or lie do a a loneliness lead to a deterioration in physical functioning.
Frailty be consider a risk factor for more severe and even fatal outcome of a SARS-CoV-2 infection.
Loneliness, isolation, a a less support and acti-vation be expect to lead to a deterioration in ‚cognitive patient and those become infected SARS-CoV-2.
-cult to understand and implement the recommended hygiene measures, put them at an increase risk of contract SARS-CoV-2 (especially nurse home resi -dents).
Based on the available study data, it cannot be determine to extent dementia increase the COVID-19 mortality risk.
For the ‚health behaviour™ domain, there be discussion about how social distancing reduces physical activity, pro -moting the loss of muscle and endurance and the increase of frailty.
With regard to alcohol consumption, there be concern that the pandemic could lead to an increase in abuse.
How-ever, compare to young people, old people less likely to have increase their alcohol consumption during fering severe illness a a result of contract COVID-19.
Revie discuss the genetic, hormonal and immunolog -ical factor potentially contribute to the high risk face by old people follo an infection SARS-CoV-2.
Pub -lications emphasize the need for further research to well against COVID-19.
Case study show that old person may develop atypical symptom of COVID-19 (.
Reduced level of physical activ-ity, social isolation and loneliness, a a change to overall medical care bring about by the COVID-19 pan-demic be expect to lead to a deterioration in the physical health of old people.
This risk be believe to be particularly disease, dementia, cardiovascular disease or osteoporosis.
The oral health of old people could also deteriorate.
A modelling study conclude that continued physical inactiv-ity in other active, prediabetic old people could lead to an increase incidence of diabetes.
An empirical study on emergency neurological care to old people during the COVID-19 pandemic indicated prognosis due to old people delay seek medical care.
For the ‚mental health™ domain, some publication express the fear that pandemic-related loneliness and the incidence of various psychological disorder and symp-toms be expected, especially in patient pre-existing mental illness or dementia, and those live in nurse home or be admit to hospital.
Limited access to the health care system a a intensive medium coverage of the pandemic that, at times, feature negative image Social distancing measure likely increase the risk of social isolation, loneliness and physical inactivity among old people, negative consequence for health and functioning.Rapid Review find no evidence that video call old people can reduce social isolation, loneliness or symptom of depression, but the number of study and the reliability of the evidence low.
Generally, the pandemic described a a challenge for old people.
Some publication deal the blanket their increase stigmatisation and even discrimination a possible consequences.
In addition to social isolation, other challenge of the pandemic include losses, tem -porary loss of support and increase social inequality.
Indi -vidual publication also describe opportunities, such a the increase use and improved handling of technology, the strengthening of family net or increase social a of the concern of the elderly.
Field of action ‚Environmental factors A total of 71 hit find for the ‚environmental factors, and 12 empirical studies.
The publication consider the setting in old people live, receive care and how they have be alter by the pandemic.
Several empirical contribution analyse infection outbreak in nursing home and assist living settings.
Measures of infection control in health care facili-ties discuss and suggestion make for cop social isolation, boredom, reduce contact and quarantine measures.
While publication outline that, a a group, old people have a great need for protection and support, it the pandemic.
An ecological study find a negative corre-lation at the regional level bet COVID-19 morbidity the previous year.
Therefore, low COVID-19 rate find in place many people have receive a vac -cination and vice versa.
It also find that old people low education level less likely to follow infection prevention measure than those a high education; like , men less likely than to follow these measures.
Field of action ‚Participation and activity™ action ‚participation and activity™.
Of these, 19 discussion paper, empirical study focus on the health consequence of containment measure relate to the COVID-19 pan--tions, for old people.
The majority of the paper in this -tion and loneliness for old people Œ both in nursing home a a those live in their o home Œ a a result of social distancing measures.
Against this backdrop, group (for example, social and health profession -als) and public health care, a a the potential of information technologies.
In order to avoid the social isolation of old people, t study analyse programme provide telephone contact.
The result sho a high level of satisfaction the service.
In contrast, a Cochrane Infection prevention and control measures, social support, medical and nursing care must be adapt to the need of life context and their life situation.
infection protection for resident and carers in nurse homes; the equipment provide to nurse home (.
protective equipment, IT infrastructure); visit ban and restrictions; the situation face family care -givers in the home; and the public perception of old people in the context of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Table 2 provide an overview of these hits.
The contribution on visit restriction address the change that take place during the course of the relaxation of social distancing measures, start later for nurs-ing home resident compare to other groups.
In the con -text of visit bans, old people™s risk of social isolation and the potential negative consequence highlighted.
Many contribution criticise the vastly dierent rule that -ences regard the relaxation of restriction in nursing homes.
The situation for family caregiver also addressed, for example the burden cause by a lack of family caregiver and the unique burden place on relative care for people dementia.
Other topic people, for example regard to the risk of SARS-CoV-2 infection, and the avoidance of ageism.
remains important to prevent social isolation and ensure the provision of health care service and social support in nursing home and home care settings.
This require model for cross-sectoral care and the follow-up care of elderly COVID-19 patients.
Some publication analyse the challenge health care system face due to the pan- Health care professional face major challenge in term of occupational health and safety and , especially care for people mental illness or cognitive impairment.
Issues relate to limited health care resource (including triage and prioritisation), but also palliative care, stereotyping and ageism be also addressed.
Issues of social care and security a a the impact of la and regulation on old people be also discussed.
Contributions by organisation concern the pandemic and old people in GermanyUntil 29 June 2020, contribution relate to the pandemic the 14 organisation selected.
Of the 57 contribution -tions include in this review [165Œ211].
They include statements, comment and recommendation relate to Table Source: O Table Field of action or health domainContent of included publication Number of publicationsNumber of empirical study [source] Personal factorsPhysical health Heightened SARS-C - Continued on next page Table Continued Source: O Table Field of action or health domainContent of included publication Number of publicationsNumber of empirical study [source] Approaches to explain the high risk old people face infect SARS-C chronic disease hydroxychloroquine a a candidate for drug W Health issue due to non-use of health care (.
follow-up appoint-Changes in the health of people pre-existing conditions: neuro- -Patients admit a inpatient fracture (broken bones) during Deteriorated oral health negative consequence for physical Mental healthIncidence of various mental disorder or symptom such a depres-sion, anxiety disorders, post-traumatic stress disorders, adjustment disorders, sleep disorders, eat disorders, paranoid disorder and Incidence of somatoform disorders, paranoid disorders, anxiety, distrust in the health system due to medium report (.
‚information overload™) Continued on next page Field of action or health domainContent of included publication Number of publicationsNumber of empirical study [source] Groups particularly at risk of mental health deterioration: nursing home residents, hospital patient (.
little social support), people pre-existing mental Underdiagnosis and inadequate treatment of mental (pre-)condi-tions due to limited health care and discrimination (‚ageism™) and it pre-existing mental condition Lo rate of depression and anxiety symptom compare to Positive correlation bet loneliness and psychological symptom such a anxiety ‚W Physical functioningDeterioration of physical functioning due to physical inactivity (espe- Cognitive functioning Deterioration of cognitive function (dementia) due to loneliness, iso-Groups at particular risk of cognitive function deterioration: dementia after SARS-C Table Continued Source: O Table Continued on next page Table Continued Source: O Table Field of action or health domainContent of included publication Number of publicationsNumber of empirical study [source] Cognitive impairment (dementia) cause misinformation and make Health behaviourPandemic could negatively impact health behaviour (.
less physical activity, unhealthy diet, more tobacco and alcohol consumption, F likely to buy extra food and pay more attention to buying product for , (online) shopping present challenges, could potentially lead to change in eat-V Follo recommendation to contain the pandemic: old people Social participation and activitiesSocial distancing measure lead to a reduction in physical activity Development of video-based intervention to promote physical activity Increased social isolation loneliness due to restrict contact Use of information technology to reduce social isolation and loneli-Continued on next page Field of action or health domainContent of included publication Number of publicationsNumber of empirical study [source] (especially in rural areas) due to an unequal distribution of resource -Environmental factorsHealth careC - Criteria-based allocation of treatment (‚triage path ™) for people C C Barriers to stop or reduce medication in a planned process (‚deprescribing™) and overcome these barrier during the pandemic Challenges emergency care in hospital under pandemic condi-Recommendations for action on palliative care in nurse home and Transmission and appropriateness of symptom-based screening in C --ceutical intervention in the pandemic in local and national context -Table Continued Source: O Table Continued on next page Field of action or health domainContent of included publication Number of publicationsNumber of empirical study [source] Multifactorial intervention to strengthen the social and health system the aim of ensure -being, prevention and access to health Rationing of limited health care resources: advance care planning, Conditions of the health care system (.
number of hospital beds, addition to other factor (such a the proportion of > Establishment, implementation and evaluation of post-acute care - Nursing careHigh vulnerability of nursing home resident and spread of infection Public health activity of various cooperate actor to ensure appro-Problems in the care of people psychiatric disorder or cognitive impairment (dementia): implementation of hygiene measure ( C physical restraint and sedationTask of health care providers: develop method for identify and Implications of the pandemic for various setting in old peo-Physical environmentLack of equipment and preparation for assist living, lack of infection Nursing home set particularly high risk, require and supervision to prevent neglect and violence a there be no social Need to optimise communication channel bet relative and Table Continued Source: O Table Continued on next page Table Continued Source: O Table Field of action or health domainContent of included publication Number of publicationsNumber of empirical study [source] Vulnerability of old people in rural area a access to social and Take into account assist living setting in the planning of strategy Social environmentVulnerable social net and social protection of old people under Changed social environment and daily life, .
less social contact and Stereotypes and disparagement of the value of old people™s life and = C= = SARS-C= Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome C Table Contributions by national level organisation Source: O Table OrganisationTitle [source]PublishedTopic German National Associ-ation of Senior Citizens™ Organisations .
BAGSO recom-Equipment and support for people recognise care need in nursing home and at homeCoronavirus epidemic in Germany: do not abandon people in care!
BAGSO statement on the Day of the Older Generation on Prevention of and service for old people experience social isolationEnd the social isolation of people in nursing homes!
BAGSO™s Relaxation and harmonisation of social distancing restrictionsImprove support for family caregiver during the coronavirus Support for family caregiversContinued on next page Table Continued Contributions by national level organisation Source: O Table OrganisationTitle [source]PublishedTopic Visits to nurse homes: facility need clear guideline and more support.
BAGSO issue call to the federal state Œ for the atten-tion of the F Uniform rule for social distanc-ing restriction in nurse home -tective equipmentVisits to nurse homes: some federal state urgently need to make improvements.
An interim assessment by BAGSO four after Relaxation and harmonisation of social distancing restrictionsEnsure basic digital service in old people™s and nursing homes.
Better digital equipment for nurs-ing homesBundesinteressenvertre--e. V. (BIVA) C Information for relative on the rule at the beginning of the pan-demicVisiting restriction in nurse home due to the coronavirus crisis.
BIV Adequateness of social distancing restriction for nursing home residentsCoronavirus: increase the protection for nursing home residents!
infection in nursing home through good equipment (.
protective gear) and regular test-Coronavirus crisis and the ‚real everyday practice of care™ in inpa -tient facility for the elderly.
Guest commentary by BIVA member Claus V Opinion piece on the situation in nurse home during the pan-demicNursing home resident still at risk Œ family caregiver be sys-Improve access to nursing home for relativesRelaxation of ban on visit to old people™s and nursing home Reduction of social distancing restriction in nurse homesReduction of social distancing restriction in nurse homes, resume audit by medical service and home supervisors-Implementation of the amend social distancing restriction in nurse homesGerman Society for Gerontology (DGG)Coronavirus: how old people can protect themselves or ‚no kiss among old peopleContinued on next page OrganisationTitle [source]PublishedTopic -Protective measure and good care for old peopleCare bottleneck: geriatrician call for crisis concept for coronavirus Protect caregiver against infec-Supplementary recommendation for geriatric patient in home care to the ‚Decisions on the allocation of resource in emergency demic by the DIVI, DGINA, DGAI, DGIIN, DGP, DGP Allocation of resource in emer-gency and intensive care medicine pandemicAfter the partial lifting of coronavirus restrictions, geriatrician recommend further protection of the elderly: ‚SARS-C Relaxation of social distancing and application of same rule across GermanyGerman Society of Gerontology and Geriatrics .
(DGGG) Statement by the DGGG: facilitate psychotherapy via phone for elderly and vulnerable female patient during the coronavirus.
Access to video appointment for elderly and vulnerable patient mental illnesses Statement by the German Society of Gerontology and Geriatrics Targeted measure accord to individual risks, not exclusively accord to age.
Public communication and reporting on ‚Coronavirus & Age: recommendation of the German Society of Gerontology and Geriatrics (DGGG), Section III (Social and Behavioural Gerontology).
Recommendations for public communication on age and pandemic: recommendation for the establishment, support and Comprehensive establishment of local emergency aid programme by municipalitiesJoint statement by the section for Geriatric Medicine (II), Social and Behavioural Gerontology (III), Social Gerontology and Assis-tance for the Elderly (IV) of the German Society of Gerontology and Geriatrics (DGGG enable participation and a social Promoting the self-determination, participation and social inclusion of old people.
Joint statement by the Social and Behavioural Gerontology (III) and Social Gerontology and Assistance for the Elderly (IV) Sections of the DGGG: participation and care for people.
Participation and care for people recognise care need in German Centre of Gerontology (DZA)of age, use non-age discriminating language Age discrimination and image of age in the coronavirus crisis Promoting the physical activity of old people
Table Continued Contributions by national level organisation elder people and their use of the internet.
Implications for the of social distancing measure for old peopleRisks of ban on social contact, social support and voluntary by Improving the digital involve-ment of old peopleStronger orientation to concrete risk in restriction and support servicesGerman Alzheimers Association (DAlzG)
Coronavirus: consideration of the unique situation face family Increasing support for family carersC Information on social distancing in nurse homesCoronavirus: the German Alzheimer™s Association call on politi -Support for family carers and people dementia in their o homesProtect dementia patients!
German Alzheimers Association call for the easing of visit ban to nurse home as early a possible Relaxation of visit ban in nurse homes. 
Visits to nurse homes: German Alzheimers Association call Uniform visiting rule in nursing homes
Closed day care facility be family caregiver fund the coro-Support for family caregiversGerman Net for Evidence-based Medicine (EbM Net )experiments the elderly and chronically ill population.
Systematic documentation and care research in the context of social isolation and visit bans.
Coronavirus in German nursing home an evidence-free drama Clinical epidemiological data tematic testing in nurse homes, establishment of a registryKuratorium Deutsche Altershilfe .
A statement by the Kuratorium Deutsche Altershilfe Maintain and enable protection, participation and self-determina-tion of old people and people in need of careSocial policy peril and misstep during the coronavirus pandemic.
Ensure self-determination and participation for old people -ing measuresContinued on next page public health frame of the WHO Action Plan on Ageing and Health, the of the COVID-19 pandemic on activity and environmental factor consider .
Only a very small proportion of the extremely high health.
The publication hit reveal serious impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the health and being of old 4.
DiscussionThis scoping review aim to provide an overview of inter -national and German publication on the direct and indirect of the COVID-19 pandemic on the health of aim of this evaluation to identify gap in the evidence concern the initial phase of the COVID-19 pandemic and, thus, area require further research.
Based on a biopsychosocial understanding of health and guide by the Organisation.
Should older employee have to stay a from the ?
Results of a systematic literature search (rapid scoping review) Measures to protect old in the isolation a a mortality risk for old people.
result of a systematic literature review (rapid scoping review) supplement Consequences of social isolation and loneliness for health in nursing home and the lifting of social distance measures. 
Proportionality of social distanc-ing measures, position take by of dyingGeneral ban on visit to nurse.
Social distancing a compulsory care measure and the conse-quences for old people Urgent coronavirus statement: visit ban in nurse home Social distancing measure be not proportionate, demand for immediate removal.
Table Continued Contributions by national level organisation Source German Alzheimer™s Association., DGG = German Society for Gerontology, DGGG = German Society of Gerontology and Geriatrics., DZA = German Centre of Gerontology, EbM-Netz = German Net for Evidence-Based Medicine., KDA = Kuratorium Deutsche Altershilfe., DIVI = Deutsche Interdisziplinäre Vereinigung für Intensiv- und Notfallmedizin ., DGINA = Deutsche Gesellschaft Interdisziplinäre Notfall- und Akutmedizin ., DGAI = Deutsche Gesellschaft für Anästhesiologie und Intensivmedizin ., DGIIN = German Society for Internal Intensive Care and Emergency Medicine ., DGP = German Society for Pneumology and Respiratory Medicine ., DGP = German Society for Palliative Medicine ., AEM = Academy for Ethics in Medicine = SARS-C= Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome C ing only the initial month of the pandemic, it seem plausible that empirical data be predominantly available from -demic, such a China 139, Italyand Spain.
This be especially true for empirical study analyse nursing homes.
Only t out of the 50 empirical study come from Germany, and both analysed medical care.
A point to take into account be that continuous data collection, be common in other countries, for example in US nursing home the Resident Assessment Instrument (RAI), do not take place in Germany.
During the pandemic, it either not possible to collect data in German nursing Mandatory documentation requirement suspend in nurse home in Germany.
In addition, visit and mon -itoring by the Health Insurance Medical Service (MDK) and internal supervision drastically reduced.
There thus a lack of social control and information on the quality of care dur-ing the pandemic be limited.
The same applies to the frequency patient sedated, measure that deprive patient of their freedom applied, or challeng-ing behaviour in dementia patient occurred.
As of the reporting date, there no empirical data available on the situation in home care from the perspective of those ho , now also available for Germany.
An overview of the available evidence be be compile by the Competence Net Public Health COVID-19 .
Empirical data on be largely limited to the observation of the high risk for a people in all thref action and the associated health domains.
Ho , in the initial stage of the COVID-19 pandemic, discussion paper (.
statements, position papers) predominate overall, literature revie and empirical study account for only a third of hits.
The distribution of empirical study among under 20% in the ‚environmental factors™ and ‚participa Many of the empirical study base on cross-sec-tional online survey small convenience sample -out any claim to representativeness , case series or individual case study.
These study have only limit validity since other sample strategy be need for old and very old people health impair-ments, for example, nursing home resident [212Œ214].
In addition, there be an urgent need for representative popu-lation-based study of old people live at home in dif-ferent living context (.
people live alone in private , family caregivers) in order to assess the consequence of the pandemic for old people.
Here, the evaluation of epidemiological data in Germany collect at the RKI during the course of the pandemic (.
GEDA COSMO60+, RKI-Corona-Monitoring, 65+) can contribute to describe the -being and health status of old people before and during the pandemic.
Considering the limited time period that cover by the search (1 December 2019 to 16 June 2020), includ-consequences include a deterioration in the physi -cal and mental health, a a the physical and cognitive functions, of old people in nurse home and private mortality develop and change in mortality occur by place of death.
Regarding the vaccination against sentiveness of the various available vaccines, especially in frail and very old people.
A central question, be also increasingly be discussed in international publication be how to encourage empirical research on the above mentioned questions, in particular research require personal contact.
There also be a need to clarify the option for analyse the consequence of COVID-19 base on the -miological studies.
To meet these challenges, ideally, for the systematic compilation of result produced by empirical study concern old people become available, such a the one set up for longterm care (Example: LTC-COVID ).
Numerous publication highlight the fact that the COVID-19 pandemic have make social tendency to age discrimination visible, and this issue address assessment and medical triage of COVID-19 patient on the basis of chronological age mentioned, a the indiscriminate application of measure to restrict contact and mobility.
Some contribution also against paternalistic attitude indicate expectation on how old people should behave.
the demand for self-isolation), severe COVID-19 for particularly vulnerable group of old people, include old people in nurse home and frail old people have undergone emergency hospitalisa-tion follo a hip fracture.
Ho limit health care during the COVID-19 pandemic, be directly applicable to the situation in Germany.
Overall, men seem to run a high risk than of a severe COVID-19.
Very few empirical study on -ical health of old people available during the research period.
The result indicate that fear of negative health consequence due to reduce physical activity result from social distance measures, but also due to a delayed access to medical care, could prove true.
Initial empirical study on the impact of the pandemic on old people™ sitution of negative consequences.
Ho , during the initial phase of the COVID-19 pandemic, no data on the potential longer-term consequence yet available.
During the research period, no empirical data avail-able on the provision of medical care to older COVID-19 patients, nor for acute medical care or for medical and nursing follow-up care for old people recover from COVID-19.
Similarly assess how the pandemic impact the quality of out-patient and inpatient medical care for multimorbid or frail old people, or for develop quality standards.
The extent of the short and mediumterm health consequence of the pandemic for old people also remain unclear.
Such The COVID-19 pandemic highlight the threat of age discrimination and the need to raise societal a of the fact that old people form a heterogeneous group.are available to ju the quality of discussion papers, make up the majority of the include The result of this systematic literature review up to June of the COVID-19 pandemic on the health and -being of old people can already be expect even during the ini-tial stage of the pandemic.
There be an urgent need for empirical research, especially implementation and inter-vention research, that address both infection prevention and control a a the impact of containment measure on old people in a range of life situation through-out the COVID-19 pandemic.
Individual (intrinsic) health, functional and social resource and external contextual factors, such a living circumstances, medical and nursing care and social support services, must be take into account.
During the COVID-19 pandemic, it have become clear that continuous and systematic health reporting for the population age 65 and old be needed; it must also be able to take into account the heterogeneity of this age group.
For this purpose, a basis of data need to be estab -lished that can be use in a low-threshold manner and en - able timely analyses.
The COVID-19 pandemic have sho the danger of a generalising and partly discriminatory approach regard age.
The reality of demographic change this topic in all area of society.
There call for a social discourse that recognise the hetero -geneity of old people a a group and adapts medical, nurs-ing and social care structure to the largely diverse need of old people and particularly vulnerable group (.
people in need of care, those be socially isolated or physically and cognitively impaired).
Including new tech-nologies and digital medium in a process of adaptation that lead to the creation of appropriate infrastructure and service at the individual and municipal level see a a challenge, but also a an opportunity.
This scoping review have it strength and limitations.
The search conduct for the period from 1 December 2019 to 16 June 2020 in literature archive prepare by the RKI and thus refers exclusively to the initial phase of the COVID-19 pandemic.
The systematic search rely on the t most important medical and health science databases, PubMed and Embase, a a several preprint servers.
The search term broadly discuss and agree upon by the author and include key a a free text terms.
T -many, national contribution via the of relevant organisation include in addition to the literature search.
to provide a systematic overview of the current discourse on the situation of old people during the initial stage of the COVID-19 pandemic, this search strategy seem suitable, but do not claim to be exhaustive.
An important limitation of our analysis be that the quality of the study include not assessed.
Ho , the aim of the review to take account of the topic and issue be discuss and not to assess the study results.
