Germany_LTC_COVID-19-26-May-2020.pdf
The German government has issued financial support and loosened monitoring for care-providers during this pandemic so that the residential and ambulatory care that people receive can be maintained. 
As part of this approach, long-term care-insurance will reimburse institutions providing care that incur additional costs or loss of revenue due to the COVID-19 outbreak.
The German government has announced an increase in care-workers' wages. 
In addition, care-workers across Germany will receive a one-off bonus.
The German government has extended existing support for people with care-needs and their unpaid carers.
Residential care-settings across Germany have started to allow their residents to have visitors. 
The care-settings must develop and implement complex safety protection plans to facilitate this.
The Robert-Koch-Institute (RKI) provides regularly updated guidance, recommendations and advice for specific care-settings. 
This includes the establishment of zones to physically separate residents during outbreak and contact tracing.
The RKI issues a daily update on the number of confirmed and recovered COVID-19-cases as well as of the number of COVID-19 related deaths.
There is a lack of information and advice regarding the care of people living with dementia.
The Robert-Koch-Institute (RKI) monitors infectious and non-communicable diseases in Germany. 
It also conducts research and advises relevant ministries, especially the Ministry of Health. 
The RKI is involved in the development of guidelines and norms. 
According to their daily update (as of 25-May-2020), there had been 178,570-confirmed-cases of COVID-19 in Germany (an increase of 289 in comparison to the day before). 
Of the confirmed-cases, 19% were in people aged 70-years or older. 
Out of all confirmed-cases an estimated 161,200 have recovered and 8,257-people (4.6%) have died. 
Of those who have died, 86% of people were aged 70-or-older.
The RKI estimates that the 7-days reproduction number for Germany on 25-May-2020 was R=0.84. 
The means that on average every person with a COVID-19 infection infects one other person and that the number of newly infected people is showing a small reduction.
From 23-March until 20-April-2020 a ban on public assembly has been in place across Germany as an effort to slow the spread of the infection. Gatherings of more than two people, with few exceptions, were forbidden. 
This did not apply to families and persons who live in the same household. 
In addition, restaurants and businesses for body care (e.g. hairdressers, cosmetic studios) had to close. 
The Federal State of Bavaria had enforced a curfew from 20-March-2020 (starting at midnight) until 5-May-2020.
On 27-March-2020, the Federal Council (Bundesrat) agreed to the new legislation on the protection of the population during an epidemic situation of national significance (Gesetz zum Schutz der Bevölkerung bei einer epidemischen Lage von nationaler Tragweite) that had passed the German lower chamber (Bundestag) on 25 March-2020. 
The law alters the usual organisation and competences of the Federal Ministry of Health (Bundesministerium für Gesundheit) by allowing it to declare an 'epidemic situation of national significance'. 
This declaration enables the Federal Ministry of Health to issue regulations and bills concerning the basic supply of medication, including narcotics, medical products, laboratory diagnostics, aids, protective equipment and products for disinfection, and to increase healthcare resources (personnel) without requiring approval from the Federal Council (Bundesrat). 
The German lower chamber and the Federal Council can ask to cancel this law and the federal government is required to rescind these special powers as soon as they are longer required. 
Measures taken under the epidemic situation law to respond to the epidemic then lose their validity. 
It is understood that declaring an epidemic situation of national significance overrides the authority of the federal states that are usually in charge of managing infectious diseases.
As of 1-April-2020, the RKI changed its advice and recommended the wearing of mouth-nose protection (community non-medical masks) in public. 
The wearing of community masks is recommended in situations where the protective distance cannot always be maintained(such as in shops). 
The institute maintains that the best way to protect oneself and others from an infection with COVID-19 is good hand hygiene, adhering to rules regarding coughing and sneezing and to keep a distance of at least 1.5-meters from others.
The districts (Landkreise) Jena and Nordhausen City (Stadt) were the first to make the wearing of a cover of mouth and nose mandatory in shops, public transport and official buildings (e.g. town halls). 
By 22-April-2020 all federal states have moved from recommending the wearing of mouth-nose protection in public to announcing their mandatory use in public transport and/or shops and in some states also on markets. 
This includes Baden-Württemberg, Bavaria, Berlin, Brandenburg, Bremen, Hamburg, Hessen, Mecklenburg-Western-Pomerania, Lower-Saxony, North-Rhine-Westphalia, Rhineland-Palatinate, Saarland, Saxony, Saxony-Anhalt, Schleswig-Holstein and Thuringia.
On 20-April-2020, Chancellor Merkel announced that the Federal Ministry of Health will finance the training of mobile teams that will be established to support the local health authorities with contact tracing. 
The aim is to establish a 5 person contact tracing team for every 20,000 residents. 
These teams will be hosted within the health authorities and will be supported by police officers. 
The people employed on the contract tracing teams have started receiving online training since 6-April-2020. 
After that they will receive training specific to the context of the health authority to which they are deployed. 
In addition, a service unit at the RKI will be established to enable a continuous point of contact for local health authorities.
From 20-April onwards first steps were taken to lift some restrictions. 
In many federal states' shops started to open. 
At the beginning of May next steps were taken to prepare towards the opening of playground, museums, zoos and places of worship and some federal states ease some of the contact restrictions. 
In early May agreements were made to loosen some contact restrictions and to enable the opening of restaurants and cafes. 
Since mid-May borders between Germany, Austria, Switzerland and France have started opening up again. 
Some contact restriction as well as hygiene and distancing rules can be expected to remain in place until 5 June and large events are prohibited until 31 August.
On 19 May the second bill on the protection of the population during an epidemic situation of national significance (zweites Gesetz zum Schutz der Bevölkerung bei einer epidemischen Lage von nationaler Tragweite) was enacted. 
It contains a number of measures to enable more testing and to detect infectious chains early, to financially recognise care-workers, to support people with care-needs receiving domiciliary and unpaid care, to support public health services, to offer more flexibility for apprentices and students in the health sector, to offer more flexibility and less bureaucracy for the insured, administration and health services and to offer more solidarity with European neighbours.
On 21-May-2020 the RKI reported that 15,757 residents and 8,935 staff with confirmed COVID-19 infections have been recorded in care-settings. 
These numbers include the number of cases in care-setting for older people, people with special needs, people with care-needs, homeless people, people living in residences for asylum seekers, other forms of mass accommodation and prisons. 
Among this group, 3,138 residents and 46 members of staff have been reported to have died. 
The number of staff that died in care-settings is higher than that of staff in health care-settings.
The RKI also records COVID-19-cases among health-care staff. 
Of the confirmed-cases, 12,393-people (73% female, 27% male) worked in hospitals, doctors' surgeries, dialysis centres, ambulatory care-services or in the ambulance service. 
The reported median age for this group is 41-years. 
There were 20 COVID-19 related deaths recorded among health care-workers. 
However, information is missing from around 29% of recorded-cases. 
This means that the true numbers of people infected with COVID-19 and those that have died as a result of the infection in health and long-term care-setting may be higher.
There is no information available about how many people in receipt of community-based care, or their unpaid or paid carers have been infected or how many have died over the last couple of months several outbreaks of COVID-19 in care-and-nursing-homes across Germany have been reported in the media. 
Following a report by the ARD-programme FAKT (television) at least 520 nursing-homes across Germany have been affected by COVID-19 infections. 
This information is based on a survey the journalists conducted among Ministries of Health across the 16 federal states. 
However, no information could be obtained from Saarland and Saxony-Anhalt.
Germany has a population of 83.1 million. 
In 2018, 17.9 million-people were aged 65-years and older (22% of the population). 
According to the German Federal Statistical Office (Destatis), in 2017 there were 3.4 million-people with long-term care-needs, 63% women.
The majority of people with long-term care-needs, as in many other countries, receive support in their own homes (76%). 
Of those receiving support at home, 68% do so from unpaid family carers and 32% receive (additional) support through one of the 14,100 ambulatory care-providers. 
Most of the people receiving care at home are registered as having moderate care-levels (levels 2 to 3). 
Destatis estimates that 818,289 (24%) people with long-term care-needs live in Germany's 14,500 care-and-nursing-homes. 
Most people living in institutional care-settings have moderate to considerable care-needs (levels 3 to 4).
Support for long-term care-needs is organised through care-providers and financed largely through the long-term care-insurance that every working German, irrespective of whether they are insured through a sickness fund or through a private provider, has to pay. 
People with long-term care-needs can decide whether they prefer financial and/or in-kind support.
The main goal of the insurance system is to enable people with care-needs to live a self-determined life. 
However, the long-term care-insurance usually does not cover all care-related costs. 
This is where people with long-term care-needs experience out-of-pocket expenditure.
In the German long-term care-system care-needs are classified into five categories, ranging from low (level 1) to severe needs. 
People are assigned to the different categories following an assessment of six core areas of living (mobility, cognitive and communicative abilities, behaviour and psychological issues, ability to take care for oneself independently, handling of illness and therapy as well as illness related strain, and therapy and organisation of everyday life and of social contacts). 
The assessment lists 64 criteria. The care-needs must persist over at least six months. 
Depending on their level of need people receive different levels of support.
On 27 March the German Ministry of Health (Bundesgesundheitsministerium) announced a funding and support package to help care-institutions during the COVID-19 pandemic. 
Suspension of quality assessments for ambulatory and residential care as well as changes to assessment and waiving of obligatory advisory visits to people with care-needs.
Long-term care-insurance will reimburse institutions providing care that incur additional costs or loss of revenue due to the COVID-19 outbreak.
In order to maintain the provision of care, institutional care-settings will be allowed to deviate from certain rules and operational frameworks around staffing level.
The care-insurance providers will additionally support providers to avoid gaps in supply of paid home care.
Where care-providers (ambulatory and residential) are no longer able to meet the services they are due to provide they have to contact the care-insurances immediately and search for alternatives in collaboration with health and regulatory authorities to ensure that people's care-needs can be met in.
On 3 March, the National Association of Statutory Health Insurance Funds (GKV Spitzenverband) issued a statement on the rescue package to support care-providers during the pandemic. 
Besides outlining the different components of the new legislation, the association also provides information on estimated costs. 
According to health ministry estimates, the association expects to spend approximately an additional €10 per month per person with care-needs for protective equipment. 
Assuming additional costs for seven months for four million people with care-needs, this results in an additional cost of €280 million.
The association states that costs for additional carers for ambulatory care and care in residential settings cannot be estimated yet. 
In the example provided, the monthly costs of an additional care assistant in an institutional setting for the employer is estimated to be around €2,200, while the cost of a qualified carer in an ambulatory care-setting is estimated to be €3,300. 
It cannot be predicted how many additional carers and care assistants are likely to be required.
In addition, the National Association of Statutory Health Insurance Funds outlines how people with care-needs can be supported in cases where the usual ambulatory care or replacement care cannot be provided. 
The document states that the cost of support through other people can be reimbursed for up to three months. 
In the first example provided, a care recipient (level 5) who usually receives care through an ambulatory care-provider and without direct family support receives support from an employee of a temporarily closed day care institution. 
The care-recipient can claim up to €1,995 to cover the cost of the replacement support. 
The second example describes the situation of a person with care level 2 who usually receives care from her daughter as well as from an ambulatory care-provider. 
The care-recipient receives direct payments (60%) and in-kind support (40%). 
In this hypothetical-case, the ambulatory care-provider is unable to provide its services due to quarantine or illness of the carer and the daughter is unable to step up her care-commitment due to employment. 
A neighbour steps in to provide the 40% the ambulatory service would have covered. 
The neighbour in this case can bill the care-insurance for support she or he has been providing for up to €275 (40% in-kind support).
Thuringia and Berlin are starting an initiative to increase the basic security pay for people in need. 
This recognises that people that usually rely on support of food banks and other supportive interventions cannot access these services, which may make life even more expensive.
This top-up will benefit people of all ages.
Schleswig-Holstein will support their health authorities with €5 million over the next 12-months. 
This should enable the recruitment of 100 new members of staff. 
The additional staff members could support contact tracing activities.
On 23-April the German government announced minimum wage for nursing assistants will be increased from 1-May-2020 to 1-April-2022 in four steps until they reach €12,55 across Germany. 
Qualified assistants that have undergone a one-year apprenticeship will receive a minimum wage of €12,50 (West) or €12,20 (East) as of 1-April-2021. 
From 1-April-2022 minimum wage across Germany for this group will be €13,20. 
For care-workers with three-year apprenticeship minimum wage will be €15 as of 1-April-2021. 
This will increase to €15,40 by 1-April-2022. 
In addition to the vacation-days workers are legally entitled to, all care-workers will receive additional paid-days off. 
The Bavarian Minister for Healthcare and the Bavarian Minister of Finance announced that the catering for all staff in health and care-setting (hospital, care-or-nursing-homes) will be financially supported (€6.50 per member of staff per day) as a sign of appreciation of their role in responding to the pandemic (as of 1-April-2020).
On 7-April-2020, it was reported the Bavarian cabinet had decided that around 250,000 paid carers working in care-and-nursing-homes as well as in care-settings for people with special needs will receive a single payment of €500 (tax-free) in recognition of the work they have been providing during the pandemic. 
This will cost the federal state of Bavaria €126 million. 
As part of the updated measures, the Bavarian Ministry for Healthcare announced that care-workers in care-and-nursing-homes, hospitals, rehabilitation hospitals, care-settings for people with specials needs, ambulatory care-services and ambulance staff who regularly work more than 25 hours per week can apply to receive €500. 
Those regularly working 25 hours or fewer per week can apply to receive €300. 
This money comes out of a special fond put together to respond to COVID-19.
The trade union VERDI reported on 6 April-2020 that following meetings with the federal association of employers in the care-industry (Bundesvereinigung-der-Arbeitgeber-in-der-Pflegebranche (BVAP)) they had agreed on key points for a special payment for care-workers in institutional long-term care-settings and ambulatory care to reflect the additional burden during the pandemic. 
According to this agreement, the parties have agreed that full-time staff should receive a single payment of an additional €1,500 as part of their July pay. 
Part-time workers should receive the premium proportional to their hours worked and apprentices should receive €900. 
The organisations will continue working towards the implementation of this plan.
The second law for the protection of the population during an epidemic situation of national significance (zweites-Gesetz-zum-Schutz-der-Bevölkerung-bei-einer-epidemischen-Lage-von-nationaler-Tragweite), which was accepted on 14-May includes financial recognition of staff in residential and ambulatory care-setting:
All people employed in old age care will be able to make a staggered claim on a one-off bonus payment (Corona-Prämie) of up to €1,000. 
The highest bonus payment will be made to full-time staff providing direct care and support.
Apprentices, people providing voluntary services, workers during their voluntary social year agency workers and workers in service companies shall receive a bonus payment.
The social care-insurance will reimburse employers for the bonus initially. 
During the second-half-2020 the Federal Ministry of Health (Bundesministerium-für-Gesundheit) and the Federal Ministry of Finance (Bundesministerium-für-Finanzen) will decide over the extent of a government grant for health and care-insurances to enable the stabilisation of the contributions rate.
The federal states and employers in care can increase the one-off bonus up to the tax and social security tax free amount of €1,500.
The federal states of Saarland (13-May), Hamburg (14-May), Rhineland-Palatinate (19 May) and Schleswig-Holstein (24) announced to increase the one-off carer bonus to up to €1,500.
General criteria for the discharge from hospital into community settings have been provided by the RKI. 
This guidance was updated 15-May-2020. 
People can be discharged into isolation at home where, following medical assessment, ambulatory support can be provided and if they meet relevant criteria (i.e. medical assessment concludes mild degree of illness, person does not fall into groups at risk of complications, such immunosuppression, relevant chronic illnesses, old age, can care for themselves, can adhere to recommended behaviours, possibility to stay in single room that can be aired, ambulatory medical support available, contact to local health authority, availability of support from a health person (without risk factors)). 
Discharge without further restrictions is possible if the patient has not had relevant symptoms for at 48 hours and had two negative tests (one oropharyngeal, one nasopharyngeal) taken at the same time.
People with long-term care-needs who have been living in care-or-nursing-homes or those that require care in residential settings following hospitalisation pose the greatest care coordination challenge. 
Due to the vulnerability of residents living in care-and-nursing-homes, as outlined above, many care-home providers fear an outbreak. 
Some larger care-homes, such as a care-home in Kiel, have freed up short-term spaces specifically for people discharged from hospital. 
However, the isolation of residents following hospitalisation poses challenges for smaller institutions.
The RKI outlines the following criteria for hospital discharge in nursing-homes (updated version from 20-May-2020). 
First, there has to have been clinical improvement that, based on medical assessment, allows for continued ambulatory support in isolation in the care-home as well as a requirement that the environment in which the patient will be looked after is appropriate. 
Patients discharged from hospitals into a care-home can only be released from isolation in the care-home after at least 14-days following hospital discharge, and if the patient has been free of COVID-19 related symptoms for at least 48 hours. 
A medical consultation for this decision is required. 
If patients are being discharged from hospital they only do not have to quarantined in nursing-homes if they have been free of COVID-19 related symptoms for at least 48 hours and had 2 negative polymerase chain reaction (PCR) tests (one oropharyngeal, one nasopharyngeal) taken at the same time.
Most federal states have allowed care-homes to continue to receive new residents and residents discharged from hospitals if they follow regulations and guidelines in line with the RKI recommendations outlined above. 
An overview of the specific responses by the different Federal States can be found in the Annex.
The RKI recommends that care-homes should coordinate the admission of new residents from the community with the relevant health authority.
Recommendations for asymptomatic persons: People without any symptoms of COVID-19 should ideally be isolated in the care-home for 14 but at least for 7-days. 
If the person develops symptoms of COVID-19 testing should take place as soon as possible. 
Even for asymptomatic, people testing for COVID-19 is recommended. 
Particularly towards the end of the incubation period a test should be able to pick up an infection in an asymptomatic person.
The high-risk of infection to people living in care-and-nursing-homes has been recognised and different bodies across Germany have issued guidance and recommendations.
The latest update of the recommendations regarding prevention and management of COVID-19 in long-term care-settings for older-people and people with special needs by the RKI (as of 20-May-2020) recommends that the managers of care-homes and the relevant health authority work together to develop a COVID-19 plan. 
This plan should follow the regulations issued by the relevant state government (Landesregierung) in each federal state.
Aspects that should be considered in the development of the plan include:
Putting together a team with designated responsibilities for specific areas (e.g. hygiene, communication, acquisition of materials).
Informing residents, their relatives and staff of relevant protective-measures. 
Informing and training staff regarding the use of protective-measures and equipment.
Training of all staff, especially cleaners, in hygiene, physical distancing and other relevant procedures.
Organising-measures to reduce the numbers of contacts within the institutional setting.
Setting and implementing rules for visitors and external providers (e.g. hair dressers, chiropodists, physiotherapists, people in pastoral capacity).
Under specific circumstances, and in collaboration with the relevant health authorities, care-settings can impose a ban to take on new residents.
If possible, providing alternative ways for communication Implementing regulations around staff absence.
Small-groups of designated residents should be organised for activities that need to be done collectively. 
This reduces the number of contacts in case of a COVID-19 infection.
Staff should work, if possible, in designated, independent teams.
The updated document further provides detailed information on hygiene-measures as well as for infection control in residential care-settings.
Basic hygiene rules, including hand hygiene (hand washing before and after preparing meals, before eating, after using the toilet, after having been outside, after touching jointly used surfaces (e.g. door handles) should be strictly adhered to. 
This includes adhering to coughing and sneezing rules, people should avoid touching their faces (especially mouth and nose), remaining physical distancing (1.5-2m), reducing contact with others (residents, visitors).
All staff with direct contact to particularly vulnerable people should be wearing mouth-nose protection to protect patients, even when they are not engaging in direct care-tasks.
In addition, when caring for people at risk who display respiratory symptoms, the person cared for should also wear mouth nose protection, if tolerable.
Furthermore, a number of recommendations have been made regarding the provision of single use tissues, location of bins, types of disinfectants to be used, daily disinfection routine and medical equipment.
The RKI also provided recommendations around preventative-measures for care-workers:
The health status of staff should be monitored daily.
Staff should monitor their own health and inform management if they experience relevant symptoms.
Leave of staff due to respiratory symptoms, a confirmed COVID-19 infection or due to quarantine/isolation following contact with an infected person should be recorded.
There should be a low threshold for testing of care-and-nursing-home staff and testing should be done without delay.
If there is sufficient testing capacity it could be considered in collaboration with the local health authority to regularly test staff (weekly or more frequently).
In high-risk institutions (very large care-settings with dense occupancy or in regions with high COVID-19 incidence) the possibility for regular (weekly or more frequently) testing before shift commences should be explored.
While the RKI offers information based on epidemiological studies, binding guidelines and directives, as well as recommendations, are provided by the ministries responsible for health and by the Landesgesundheitsämter (health authorities) in each of the 16 federal regions (Bundesländer).
From 2-April bans on visitors to care-and-nursing-homes were put in place in many federal states. 
These include Baden-Württemberg, Bremen, Brandenburg, Hamburg, Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania, Rhineland-Palatinate, Saxony, Saxony-Anhalt, Schleswig-Holstein and Thuringia. 
Berlin operated under more relaxed rules. 
From May-2020 all federal states lifted some of the restrictions and enabled people living in residential care-settings to have some visitors.
An overview of responses implemented during the full closure of residential care-settings by Federal States can be found in the Annex.
In the extended advice document (as of 20-May-2020) the RKI provides information on measures regarding space and personnel in care-homes.
Residents that have tested positive or are suspected of having COVID-19, residents with symptoms and their contacts should be moved into single rooms, ideally with their own wet room. 
These residents must not participate in activities with residents that have tested negative.
If there is evidence of COVID-19 in an institution, the institution (space and staff) should be separated into three areas: 
one area for those without symptoms and without contact with affected people; 
one area for those with suspected cases (residents showing symptoms or who have been in close contact with infected residents) who have not yet had test results; and one area for people who have tested positive for COVID-19. 
The guidance states that should additional infectious diseases be prevalent (e.g. influenza), additional areas need to be established. 
Staff should only be working in one of the designated areas.
Staff supporting residents with suspected and confirmed-cases should be trained and not be asked to care for others.
Staff caring for residents with suspected and confirmed-cases should wear personal protective equipment including mouth-nose protection or preferably FFP2 masks, protective gown, safety goggles and single use gloves. 
For all activities that involve aerosol production breathing masks (FFP2 or higher) should be worn.
Personal protective equipment should be put on before entering the room of the resident and taken off before leaving the designated decontamination area or the resident's room.
Protective equipment and information for its use should be placed immediately at the entrance to living quarters.
Due to the experience of asymptomatic-cases it should be considered for staff working on an ward affected by a COVID-19 outbreak to wear personal protective equipment. 
It is recommended to expand hygienic-measures early across the ward.
Bins for the disposal of single-use equipment should be placed on the inside by the door.
Single use gloves should be disposed of before leaving the room into a closed container.
There is also guidance regarding hand hygiene and the type of disinfectant to be used.
The document further describes procedures for the cleaning and disinfection of the surrounding environment (e.g. surfaces), of medical products, crockery, mattresses, bedding and laundry as well as for waste disposal.
Information on strategies to protect residents should be made available to staff, residents and their visitors.
The guidance document also provides specific advice for moving residents infected with COVID-19 within as well as outside the institutional care-setting:
The destination should be informed regarding the arrival ahead of time (if this is an external transfer the receiving institutions is to be informed about the suspected/confirmed COVID-19 infection).
Only one person should be transported, and the person should wear mouth-nose protection as far as their health status allows for this.
Contact with other residents or visitors should be avoided.
The means of transport as well as other contact surfaces should be disinfected immediately after transport.
The RKI document emphasises that currently there is no confirmed evidence when people with COVID-19 stop being infectious.
The institution's hygiene expert in collaboration with the company doctor and the health authority should also inform and train medical staff on the correct use of protective equipment and self-monitoring of symptoms. 
They should ideally exempt staff providing care for COVID-19-cases from caring for other patients/care recipients and centrally document results of the self-monitoring of symptoms and record test results (if applicable) obtained within 14-days of contact to the confirmed-case. 
The health authority should be informed about exposed staff. 
Should a member of staff develop symptoms they should immediately stop duty and possible situations of exposure should be explored. 
The health authority needs to be provided with the name of the affected member of staff and the relevant person should be self-isolating until there is diagnostic clarity of their situation (availability of test results).
Medical/care staff working with confirmed COVID-19-cases are encouraged to maintain a diary in which they record self-checking of symptoms (examples of diary are available on the RKI website 23). 
Medical staff should also immediately inform the company doctor and the health authority if they have been exposed without adequate protective equipment or realised that protective-measures were impaired. 
Depending on judgment of risk it may be appropriate to self-isolate at home.
The RKI guidelines also recommend contact tracing of contact persons in cooperation with the local health authority. 
Successful contact tracing enables the interruption of infectious chains. 
Contact tracing of COVID-19-cases in care-or-nursing-homes is to be prioritised.
The Robert-Koch-Institute has provided an overview for contact tracing in the case of COVID-19 infection. 
The local health authority has to be informed about each suspected and confirmed-case of COVID-19.
The health authority is the responsible for contacting the person, identifying potential contacts, providing them with information and establishing preventive-measures.
The RKI recommends that all contacts a COVID-19-case has had until up to two-days before symptoms began should be listed. 
These contacts are categorised into category 1 category 2 and category 3.
Category 1 contacts are people that have cumulatively been exposed to at least 15 minutes face-to-face contact or where there has been direct contact of secretion or body fluids of the infected person (for medical and care personnel exposure without protective equipment). 
These contacts are deemed as at high-risk of having been infected. 
Their details will be registered with the health authority and there will be a follow-up investigation.
Category 1 contacts will be asked to isolate at home away from other household members, to maintain frequent handwashing and coughing etiquette, to monitor their body temperature twice-a-day, to keep a diary and to inform the relevant health authority on a daily basis.
If this person previously was registered as a COVID-19-case, they can be considered as category 3 contact. 
If there are no symptoms, where possible testing should be undertaken 5-7 following the first contact to the confirmed-case. 
If the exact contact time is unknown testing on day 1-and-7-10-days following the contact tracing is recommended. 
This advice is also given for specific circumstances, such as for people in care-and-nursing-homes.
Category 2 contacts are people that had less than 15 minutes face-to-face contact (i.e. people in the same room) and that had no direct contact to secretion or body fluids. 
The health authority is not required to register the contact's name, but may provide information on the disease and routes of infection. 
Category 2 contacts should reduce contacts to third parties where possible, they should maintain hand hygiene and adhere to coughing etiquette, they should check for symptoms once-a-day and maintain a diary. 
If contacts develop symptoms they must self-isolate, contact the health authority and may be require medical consultation and adhere to advice from the health authority.
Category 3 contacts are medical/care staff that had contact with a confirmed-case (≤2m, for example while providing care or as part of a medical examination) while wearing adequate protective equipment throughout the entire contact time as well as medical staff with contact (>2m) without direct contact with secretion, excretions or aerosol exposure.
Testing for this at-risk population should be done at a low threshold (more details in the guidance document) and the local health authority is to be informed regarding suspected, confirmed and deceased cases of COVID-19. 
In collaboration with the local health authority regular testing (e.g. twice per week) could be implemented to monitor the ongoing situation in the institution.
The RKI also announced that teams are supporting outbreak containment-measures in care-and-nursing-homes in several federal states.
Some differences between federal states can be observed regarding testing of residents and staff in residential care-settings. 
An overview of the different approaches can be found in the Annex.
A media report from 14-May-2020 suggests that over 60 per cent of health authorities were unable to meet the requirements for contact tracing. 
Following a survey to which 46 percent of health authorities responded, 67 percent reported that they did not have enough staff to ensure that all close contacts of COVID-19-cases could be traced. 
Only 24 percent were able to adhere to the requirements. 
The remaining authorities did not respond. 
This report does not focus on contact tracing in care-settings. 
It is therefore impossible to comment whether contract tracing in care-settings is being delivered following the recommendations.
The Federal Ministry of Health has become involved in the procurement of protective materials. 
The Federal Ministry of Health distributes supplies to the federal states and to the Association of Statutory Health Insurance Physicians (kassenärztliche-Vereinigung). 
While the Association of Statutory Health Insurance Physicians distributes supplies to physicians providing ambulatory health care, the federal states supply all other areas requiring protective equipment.
The different states have taken different routes to support care-providers with protective equipment. 
Some states have provided information on their distribution system and given insights into the amount of equipment provided to health and social care-providers. 
So far we are only aware of guidelines on the use of advanced directives from Baden-Württemberg. 
They state that if a resident develops a severe form of COVID-19, the advance directive to exclude artificial respiration should be considered critically as an infection, such as COVID-19 and its related survival and recovery chances, may not have been considered by the person when signing the document.
The RKI has released recommendations for leave procedures during a COVID-19 outbreak in care-and-nursing-homes with both regular and reduced staff availability. 
An initiative across federal states and organisations has developed the website 'care-reserve' (Pflegereserve) where people with care qualifications can register. 
Similar initiatives have also been undertaken in Bavaria., Bremen. and Rhineland-Palatinate. 
In Berlin people with care-related professions who qualified abroad will be prioritised when applying for permission to work in Germany. 
The Minister of Health in North-Rhine-Westphalia The health minister in North-Rhine-Westphalia suggested an that people undertaking a one-year apprenticeship to become a care-assistant (Pflegeassistenz) should be required to receive a regulated training allowance. 
So far apprentices in hospitals receive such allowance, while for apprentices in long-term care-settings this remains unregulated.
This could support making the profession more attractive.
The RKI guidance emphasizes the importance of monitoring the situation in institutional care-settings. 
It is recommended that a trained person should be responsible for clinical monitoring. 
This involves (at least) daily documentation of clinical symptoms among residents and staff. 
The minimum symptoms to be monitored include fever (>37.8°C), coughing, shortness of breath, sore throats and sniffing. 
Additional symptoms to be monitored include muscular and joint pain, headaches, nausea/vomiting, diarrhoea, loss of appetite, weight loss, conjunctivitis, skin rash, apathy and somnolence. 
This information should be put together with other relevant information of the individuals. 
If there are specific members of staff responsible for specific residents this may mean that there is more sensitivity around changes to residents' health status. 
Residents and staff should be encouraged to self-report if they experience respiratory symptoms or they feel feverish.
In the Federal State of Saarland all people living and working care-homes are being tested twice for COVID-19 to get a comprehensive picture of the current situation. 
The first round of testing started on 21-April-2020, the second round of testing was due to start on 12-May-2020. 
Following the first round of testing (started on 21-April-2020), all 130 care-settings were free of COVID-19.
In Lower-Saxony 14,500 nursing-homes have received tablets to enable regular medical consultations by video call. 
In addition, the tablets are anticipated to be used for social calls with the residents' families.
The Federal Ministry of Health provided information for care-and-nursing-home visitors in May-2020. 
The document asks potential visitors to evaluate carefully whether their visit is really necessary. 
If visitors decide that their visit is important they should: 
Regularly disinfect their hands, maintain sufficient distance to other people, including residents and staff in the care-home, avoid physical contact (shaking hands, hugs) with residents, cough or sneeze into their armpit or a single use tissue, which should be disposed of afterwards and keep their hands away from their face.
In addition, the Robert-Koch-Institute has developed recommendations for visitors in residential care-settings (20-May-2020).
Social contact should generally be maintained via telephone rather than through in-person visits.
Visitors with symptoms of a cold as well as people who are contact persons to a COVID-19-case should stay away from residential care-settings.
In the case that visitors will be allowed.
Each visitor should be registered (name, date, name of resident they visited).
Visits should be minimised and limited in time.
Visitors must be informed of required protective-measures. 
Maintaining at least 1.5-2-metres distance to the resident
Wearing mouth-nose protection and a protective gown.
Hand disinfection upon leaving the resident's room.
All 16 federal states have implemented regulations that enable people living in residential care-settings to have some visitors. 
Across federal states care-settings will need to develop protection plans for each care-setting taking their specific layout and environment into consideration. 
Visitors will have to make appointments, register for contact tracing, wear mouth-nose protection and adhere to distancing and hygiene rules. 
In some federal states' visits should take place outdoors, in others visiting rooms are preferred. 
Others again enable visits in resident's rooms. 
There is also variation in frequency and length in which residents have visitors. 
In some federal states, residents can have visitors on a daily basis, while in others this is only once a week.
Updated guidance from 22-April further outlines that carers providing ambulatory care in people's homes (having direct contact with the at risk population) should wear mouth-nose protection even when they are not directly caring for a patient.
The guidance further recommends that.
If a person develops a respiratory illness or fever this should be followed up with medical consultation.
If relevant, care-staff should advise the care-recipient or people in their personal environment that the care-recipient should not be receiving visitors, especially not if they have an acute respiratory illness or other infectious disease.
When caring for people with fever and respiratory disease, protective equipment in line with recommendations should be worn. 
The required protective equipment should be available to care-staff. 
The health status of long-term care-staff should be monitored.
Staff with respiratory diseases should stay at home.
If a person is being moved from or to a different care-environment, information regarding respiratory illness or a suspected COVID-19 infection should be shared ahead of time.
Federal states have picked up on the guidelines and also provide additional rules and recommendations.
In addition, interventions, such as by the medical service of the health and long-term care-insurances (medizischer-Dienst-der-Krankenversicherung) in Berlin-Brandenburg provides an advisory telephone services for ambulatory and residential care-providers. 
This gives care-professionals an opportunity to ask questions around COVID-19. 
On 14 May the federal government agreed the second law for the protection of the population during an epidemic situation of national significance (zweites-Gesetz-zum-Schutz-der-Bevölkerung-bei-einer-epidemischen-Lage-von-nationaler-Tragweite).
This law enables people at care level 1 to use the €125 of financial support (Entlastungsbetrag) they are entitled to for wider purposes than would be allowed in normal circumstances. 
For example, normally this funding has to be used for services to relieve unpaid carers and to enhance the independence of people with care-needs. 
Now this financial support can also be used for other purposes, such as for help with the household.
This will remain in place until 30-September. 
Information about the availability of financial support and reduced barriers to enter the scheme have also been provided by the states of Saxony and North-Rhine-Westphalia.
People with care-needs (all care-levels) can use support services that have not been used (that have been save-up) until 30-September-2020.
People with care-needs can also claim up €60 (normally €40) per month for protective material and disinfectant. 
The additional funding is available retrospectively until 1-April-2020 and for as long as the COVID-19 pandemic lasts. 
This aims to reflect the increase in prices for some products.
Across Germany day and respite centres have closed. 
This is in line with RKI recommendation that non-residential care-settings should not be looking after people who have tested positive for COVID-19.
Where possible, people's care-needs would have been addressed through unpaid and ambulatory care. 
However, in cases where alternative arrangements are not feasible, day care-centres in most states can provide emergency care. 
Relevant reasons for needing of emergency care include the next of kin being a key worker.
The Senate Administration for Healthcare and Equality Berlin (Senatsverwaltung-für-Gesundheit-Pflege-und-Gleichstellung-Abteilung-Pflege) has developed recommendations for people with care-needs and unpaid family carers in the context of the COVID-19 pandemic (This was updated on 20-May-2020).
They include information transmission, symptoms, therapy and diagnostic of COVID-19.
COVID-19 related testing only takes place if there is reason to suspect infection. 
The recommendations also provide information about people at high-risk as well as protective-measure (adherence to hygiene rules, physical/social distancing, vaccination to avoid double infection for people in risk-groups).
There are also specific recommendations regarding care:
The document recommends that people at high-risk should minimise the number of visitors, which means that children aged 16-years and younger and people with symptoms of illness should not be visiting.
Care that does not require contact, such as conversation, preparation of medication or meals, cleaning or documenting care-tasks, should be performed following thorough disinfection of the hands and with 2 meters physical distance or behind closed doors. 
It is recommended that the person with care-needs stays in a different room while the carer performs these activities.
Personal care-tasks, such as body hygiene, dressing or wound dressing, should only be performed following thorough disinfection of the hands, with gloves and where possible with mouth-and-nose protection. 
The carer should not speak to the care-recipient while performing these tasks. 
Duration and extent of these tasks should depend on consideration about need and care-user protection.
Social contacts, where possible, should be maintained via regular telephone calls, online chats or videoconferencing. 
Handwritten letters are also mentioned as a possibility to stay in touch.
It should be ensured that emergency calls can be made.
Should ambulatory care-providers not be ensuring the care of the person with care-needs, it should be considered who in the family or neighbourhood could take on these tasks. 
The number of people providing support should be as small as possible.
The importance of any appointments outside the own home should be considered carefully and it should be explored whether they could be replaced through telephone or online activity. 
If an appointment is necessary people should avoid the use of public transport and instead use taxis or private cars. 
An outing with a wheelchair maybe a suitable alternative provided the person is dressed appropriately.
Updated advice on support from neighbours recognises the many initiatives that aim to support at risk population with shopping and running of errands. 
While people are encouraged to contact these sources of support, they are urged to focus on infection protection.
The Senate of Berlin also provides a list of sources with support and advice for family carers. 
Similarly, the Bavarian Ministry for Healthcare referred unpaid carers to the 110 offices for unpaid carers which have been in place in Bavaria for 20-years. 
Those offices have been advised to provide advice via telephone and email.
The guidance from Berlin also refers to the latest legal changes to support unpaid carers. 
As part of the second law for the protection of the population during an epidemic situation of national significance (zweites-Gesetz-zum-Schutz-der-Bevölkerung-bei-einer-epidemischen-Lage-von-nationaler-Tragweite) (14-May) additional provisions for unpaid carers were implemented. 
This includes that until 30-September-2020 family carers can receive care-support money (Pflegeunterstützungsgeld) for up to 20-days in situations where a gap in the community care their relative normally receives occurs. 
Under normal circumstances, this is the case for up to 10-days to compensate for a loss of income if a sudden care-need emerges within the family and the person needs to organise care in the community. 
The right to stay away from work due to an acute care situation within the own family will also be extended from 10-to-20-days until 30-September-2020. 
Additional measures to make the caregiver leave act (Pflegezeitgesetz) the family care leave act (Familienpflegezeitgesetz) more flexible to respond to the pandemic are being undertaken.
Organisations such as the Germany Alzheimer's Society and other charitable organisations and interest-groups call for recognition of family carers, financial support, protective equipment and prioritised testing.
Many people with dementia benefit from routines and may seek close contact with others.
This makes adhering to hygiene protocols difficult. 
Some people may find it difficult to understand why they should stay in isolation and they may find it difficult to adjust to disruption in their daily routines.
Where care-homes predominantly look after people with dementia, such as in the situation in Wolfsburg described above, the challenge of responding to an outbreak in the care-home is even more complex. 
In response to that situation, the residents who tested negative were separated from those who tested positive.
In Wolfsburg, the care-home initially considered evacuating those that were not infected, but as this may have caused considerable disruption to residents' lives, it was decided instead to move residents who tested negative to a separate floor, where they continued to be tested every three-days to monitor the spread of the virus.
Alzheimer's Societies in Germany have developed material (documents, podcasts and videos) to support people with dementia and their family carers during the pandemic. 
The organisations also provide telephone helplines.
In response to the infection of care-home residents, the professional association of carers in Lower-Saxony (Pflegekammer-Niedersachsen) has called for care-staff to join doctors and emergency services in communal crisis-management-groups. 
The association has further been demanding that care-recipients should regularly be tested for COVID-19. 
The association argues that this would be important because even though visitors have been banned from care-homes, staff could still carry the virus unknowingly into a care-home.
For this reason, the association was also critical of the loosening of quarantine guidance for care-staff by the RKI. 
The length of isolation specified in this guidance for medical personnel has been reduced from 14-to-7-days if the person concerned does not show any symptoms although this is only in the case of staff shortage and in agreement with the health authority.
On 24-April, the German Society for Gerontology and Geriatrics (Deutsche-Gesellschaft-für-Gerontologie-und-Geriatrie) published a statement paper on enabling the participation and social involvement of older-people despite the COVID-19 pandemic. 
This statement has ten key demands:
Chronologic age cannot not be an argument to withhold social participation.
There are no scientific reasons for excluding older-people disproportionately and blanket measures are ageist. 
It is a form of age discrimination.
Countering stigma through the message that older-people are an indispensable part of society.
Older-people as grandparents, partners, workers, volunteers, friends and consumers are an important part of society.
Social participation in employment and volunteering Workers and volunteers should not be excluded based on chronologic age. 
It is important that based on a professional risk assessment hygiene-measures are consequently implemented in work environments. 
Flanked by altering the work environment for workers with health-risks these measures protect all workers and prevent ageist working culture. 
Organisations and institutions that work with volunteers should communicate the risks involved in volunteering and where appropriate help finding satisfying alternatives for people to pursue volunteering activities.
Social participation of older-people during the COVID-19 pandemic through radio and television.
Currently media report mostly about older-people. 
It would be welcomed if older-people would be given a voice in the media and if they were to be addressed as active people, able to take decisions and actions.
Maintaining support structures even under the protective-measures of the COVID-19 pandemic. 
Service providers and authorities are requested to build up and expand innovative access especially to delivery-structures. 
This could include pharmacy, physiotherapy, ergotherapy, psychotherapy, delivery services or social services. 
Technical possibilities as well as social innovations are to be taken into consideration. 
The development and awareness raising around emergency numbers and emergency help to support older-people in emergency situations should be part of the measures that should urgently be implemented so that older-people and professional support providers can ensure people's participation and care.
Enabling opportunities for participation of people receiving care in the community and their relatives.
For the virus not to have dramatic consequences it is crucial that protective equipment becomes available without delay for people with care-needs as well as for both unpaid carers and paid carers providing ambulatory care.
Enabling social participation of older-people living alone.
Especially for this group it can be assumed that lacking social participation will not just lead to loneliness and depressive symptoms but may also cause considerable physical and cognitive damage through inactivity, malnutrition, lack of fluids, mismedication and medical under provision. 
This is also a risk for people in residential care-settings focusing on autonomy and optional support structures. 
Locally organised support programmes in all areas of support for older-people needs to be better coordinated. 
In addition to ambulatory care and the expansion of care-service points, the provision of neighbourhood support and civic support play important roles in responding to the many new and diverse challenges that have occurred in the context of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Enabling social participation of older-people in residential care-settings.
The organisation demands to expand quickly the digitalisation of residential care-settings and to also enable the use and usability of these resources through, for example, especially trained companions.
Social participation can also be enabled if the occupancy rate gets temporarily reduce to create conditions in which the recommended physical distancing can be maintained. 
It should be checked whether there are possibilities for mobile residents to temporarily move into rehabilitation settings or empty hotels. 
This would enable receiving visits from relatives and close friends. 
Protected areas could be established for these visits as they are known from infection wards in hospitals.
Concepts to support people with dementia and adequate forms of communication for people with dementia should be considered especially in the daily care routine during this crisis (e.g. through specific training of staff).
Enabling social participation in hospitals.
The concern around COVID-19 should not keep older patients from attending hospitals if they are in need of treatment, such as for cancer, severe heart disease or other illness that require hospital treatment. 
Hospitals are encouraged to make the development and implementation of intelligent and flexible concepts a priority to reduce social isolation to a minimum.
Avoiding paternalism and encouraging self-determination Older-people need to be supported through balanced (not anxiety inducing) information to make a differentiated assessment of their situation including their individual resources and risk profile. 
Self-determination based on weighing-up their options should be supported.
Measures adopted to prevent and manage COVID-19 infections in care-homes.
Measures to support care-homes in preparing and dealing with outbreaks.
National task force to coordinate COVID-19 response in care-homes.
Notification of suspected cases to Public Health authorities.
Medical doctors, care-workers and manager of facilities have to inform the local relevant health authority of a suspected, confirmed and deceased COVID-19-case.
Bavaria, Should there be a COVID-19 infection in an institution, the Infectiology Task Force will be mobilised.
In Lower-Saxony nursing-homes can request the support from mobile teams of qualified hygienists to support an outbreak of COVID-19. 
The teams are facilitated through a cooperation between the Ministry of Social Affairs, Health and Equality in Lower-Saxony (Niedersächisches-Ministerium-für-Soziales,-Gesundheit-and-Gleichstellung),the medical service of the health and long-term care-insurances (medizischer-Dienst-der-Krankenversicherung) in Lower-Saxony and the state health office.
RKI staff support infection containment in care-and-nursing-homes across Germany.
Reducing care-home occupancy to facilitate management of potential outbreaks.
On 27-March the German Ministry of Health (Bundesgesundheitsministerium) announced a funding and support package to help care-institutions during the COVID-19 pandemic. 
The measures outlined include that domiciliary and residential care will be relieved by suspending quality assessment as well as changes to assessment and the waiving of obligatory advisory visits to people with care-needs.
On 27-March the German Ministry of Health (Bundesgesundheitsministerium) announced a funding and support package to help care-institutions during the COVID-19 pandemic. 
The measures outlined include that long-term care-insurance will reimburse institutions providing care that incur additional costs or loss of revenue due to the COVID-19 outbreak.
On 3-March, the National Association of Statutory Health Insurance Funds (GKV-Spitzenverband) issued a statement on the rescue package to support care-providers during the pandemic.
Measures to prevent COVID-19 infections from entering a home.
The RKI (as of 20-May-2020) recommends that the management of residential institutions together with the relevant health authority should develop a COVID-19 plan.
This plan should follow the regulations issued by the relevant state government (Landesregierung) in each federal state. 
Aspects that should be considered in the development include:
Putting together a team with designated responsibilities for specific areas (e.g. hygiene, communication, acquisition of materials).
Informing residents, their relatives and staff of relevant protective-measures.
Informing and training staff regarding the use of protective-measures and equipment.
Training of all staff, especially cleaners, in hygiene, physical distancing and other relevant procedures.
Organising-measures to reduce the numbers of contacts within the institutional setting.
Setting and implementing rules for visitors and external providers (e.g. hair dressers, chiropodists, physiotherapists, people in pastoral capacity).
Under specific circumstances, and in collaboration with the relevant health authorities, care-settings can impose a ban to take on new residents.
If possible, providing alternative ways for communication Implementing regulations around staff absence.
Small-groups of designated residents should be organised for activities that need to be done collectively. 
This reduces the number of contacts in case of a COVID-19 infection.
Staff should work, if possible, in designated, independent teams.
The updated document further provides detailed information on hygiene-measures as well as for infection control in residential care-settings.
Basic hygiene rules, including hand hygiene (hand washing before and after preparing meals, before eating, after using the toilet, after having been outside, after touching jointly used surfaces (e.g. door handles) should be strictly adhered to. 
This includes adhering to coughing and sneezing rules, people should avoid touching their faces (especially mouth and nose), remaining physical distancing (1.5-2m), reducing contact with others (residents, visitors).
All staff with direct contact to particularly vulnerable people should be wearing mouth-nose protection to protect patients, even when they are not engaging in direct care-tasks.
In addition, when caring for people at risk who display respiratory symptoms, the person cared for should also wear mouth nose protection, if tolerable.
Furthermore, a number of recommendations have been made regarding the provision of single use tissues, location of bins, types of disinfectants to be used, daily disinfection routine and medical equipment.
The RKI also provided recommendations around preventative-measures for care-workers:
The health status of staff should be monitored daily.
Staff should monitor their own health and inform management if they experience relevant symptoms.
Leave of staff due to respiratory symptoms, a confirmed COVID-19 infection or due to quarantine/isolation following contact with an infected person should be recorded.
There should be a low threshold for testing of care-and-nursing-home staff and testing should be done without delay.
If there is sufficient testing capacity it could be considered in collaboration with the local health authority to regularly test staff (weekly or more frequently).
In high-risk institutions (very large care-settings with dense occupancy or in regions with high COVID-19 incidence) the possibility for regular (weekly or more frequently) testing before shift commences should be explored.
The guidance from the Bavarian Ministry for Healthcare (Bayerisches-Staatsministerium-für-Gesundheit-und-Pflege) (as of 3-March-2020) includes:
Every institutional care-setting should name a commissioner for the pandemic who coordinates-measures in the case of an outbreak and also acts as a contact person for the authorities.
As soon as there is suspicion of an infection, appropriate prevention and protection mechanisms need to be put in place.
Should there be a COVID-19 infection in an institution, the Infectiology Task Force will be mobilised.
Saarland: Authorities in Saarland have also developed a “protection plan” for residential care-settings.
This document, as the documents found in other federal states, is largely in line with RKI recommendations.
Guidance from Hamburg adds that contact between staff and residents should be reduced as much as possible and the number of people one carer support should also be lowered.
Ban of visitors maintained; visitors can be allowed if appropriate protective-measures against infection have been put in place, and can be use for example for relatives of a person at the end of their life; Group-activities have been stopped (17.04.2020 – 15.06.2020).
Baden-Württemberg, Residents can only leave their residential care-setting to take up medical services, to go shopping for items of daily needs if these needs are not met by the institution, for a walk (alone or with one other person), 
however, only if there is not enough space for outdoor physical activity on the premises of the care-setting (07.04.2020-03.05.2020).
Visitors should wear mouth-nose protection, gloves and an overcoat and a 2 meter physical distance must be adhered to. 
If physical aid is required for the resident, staff should be sought out for help.
Ban of visitors maintained. 
People at the end of their lives can be visited by their closest relatives.
No events with external people.
Visits should be limited to necessities. 
Residents can have one visit per day for one hour. 
Visitors must be 16-years or older and not have respiratory illness. 
There should be visiting times so that visitors can be listed and introduced to hygienic-measures.
Residents can enter and leave the house as they please but should be advised not to attend events or gatherings of people; going for a walk outdoors does not cause concerns.
Residents should avoid travelling. 
Residents that have returned from a risk area should stay 14-days in isolation (no symptoms).
No visitors, unless they attend to someone at the end of their life (17.04.2020).
Visitors are not allowed unless they attend to someone at the end of their life.
Visitors cannot be accepted unless they come to visit a person nearing the end of their life.
Visitors are not allowed in care-and-nursing-home, this is expected to last until 3-May-2020. 
Visitors may be permitted to be with a resident at their end of life. 
Visitors must adhere to hygiene rules and the length of the visit may be limited. 
A person that has entered Germany in the last 14-days is not allowed to be a visitor.
Ban of visitors maintained (20.04.2020).
The Ministry for Social Affairs and Health of Lower-Saxony (Niedersächsisches-Ministerium-für-Soziales,-Gesundheit-und-Gleichstellung) had already (effective 16-March) declared a ban on visitors in care-and-nursing-homes, unless they are the loved ones of a person receiving palliative care. 
This document remains in force until 18-April. 
On 17-March, the health authority in Lower-Saxony (Landesgesundheitsamt-Niedersachsen) recommended care-and-nursing-homes to pause community activities and for staff to avoid close contact with each other.
Recommendations from the health authority suggest that residents living in institutional care-settings should not leave the premises, such as to visit their relatives or to go shopping. 
It was further recommended that care-homes should postpone taking in new residents (non-urgent cases) to free up spaces for patients released from hospital (see recommendations 20-March-2020).
Visitors are not allowed to enter care-or-nursing-homes. 
Exceptions can be made if there medical or socio-ethical reasons, such as when a resident is receiving palliative care.
Residents are allowed to leave the premises of the care-setting, however, should only have contact with other people living or working in the care-setting. 
If this cannot be ensured, the resident is required to spend 14-days without direct contact with other residents of the care-setting.
The visiting of residents in care-and-nursing-homes is not permitted. Spouses, Fiancées or Life partners are permitted to visit. 
Exceptions can be made for people who are gravely ill or nearing the end of their life. 
The care-settings have to ensure that hygienic standards are being maintained throughout the visits. 
Children under 16 are not allowed. 
These people need to be healthy and not have been in contact with a COVID-19 infected person.
Residents can leave the care-setting if they are healthy and there is not sufficient outdoor space as part of the care/nursing-home. 
Residents are only allowed to go outside with one other person or member of staff to be walking on the premises or its near surrounding. 
Residents and staff should be wearing mouth-nose protection and gloves. 
Residents are not allowed to have contact with people outside the care-setting.
If this cannot be ensured, the resident concerned is required to be quarantined for 14-days.
Visits in residential care-settings are not allowed. 
A maximum of one person (registered) per visitor per day for a maximum of one hour can be made. 
Visitors must adhere to hygiene rules. 
Exceptions can be made for residents nearing the end of their lives or for other medical or ethnic-social reasons.
Ban of visitors maintained (17-April-2020); exceptions can be made following agreement with management of the institution and adhering to relevant terms;
Residents can have contact with closest relatives outside when adhering to physical distancing & hygiene rules, up to 5 visitors are allowed to be with a resident at the end of life.
Visitors in care-and-nursing-homes are not allowed. 
There can be exceptions for patients receiving palliative care, however, visitors cannot enter if they are infected with COVID-19, have been a contact person (I and II according to RKI criteria) or have been abroad.
Visitors are not allowed in care-and-nursing-homes. 
Exceptions may be given on a case by case basis. 
If visitors enter, they need to be registered and can stay for up to one hour, adhere to hygiene and personal protection rules. 
The time limit does not apply to visitors of people receiving palliative care. 
Visitors with respiratory illness are not allowed to enter the care-settings (31.03.2020).
Visitors are not allowed to enter care-or-nursing-homes. 
Management of care-and-nursing-homes can allow visitors under special circumstances. 
In these cases, they are required to ensure protective and hygienic-measures. 
Visitors are not allowed to enter if they had contact with a COVID-19-case.
Measures to reduce risk of staff passing on infections to residents.
Travel restrictions for care-staff.
Restrictions on staff entry into care-homes.
Ensuring care-staff only work in one care-home.
Staff remain in care-homes, usually for at least 2 weeks.
Use of Personal Protection Equipment (PPE).
Staff supporting residents with suspected and confirmed-cases should be trained and not be asked to care for others.
Staff caring for residents with suspected and confirmed-cases should wear personal protective equipment including mouth-nose protection or preferably FFP2 masks, protective gown, safety goggles and single use gloves. 
For all activities that involve aerosol production breathing masks (FFP2 or higher) should be worn.
Personal protective equipment should be put on before entering the room of the resident and taken off before leaving the designated decontamination area or the resident's room.
Protective equipment and information for its use should be placed immediately at the entrance to living quarters.
Due to the experience of asymptomatic-cases it should be considered for staff working on an ward affected by a COVID-19 outbreak to wear personal protective equipment. 
It is recommended to expand hygienic-measures early across the ward.
Bins for the disposal of single-use equipment should be placed on the inside by the door.
Single use gloves should be disposed of before leaving the room into a closed container.
The provision of protective equipment is usually organised by the provider or institutional management. 
Due to shortages, the federal government and the state are supporting the provision. 
Distribution is organised through local authorities. 
Care-providers that are running low on protective equipment can communicate their need for support through dedicated regional e-mail contacts.
Since 26 March, 300,000 protective gloves and more than 300,000 protective masks of different categories were provider. 
Daimler provided 110,000 FFP2 masks that in part have already been distributed to local authorities.
Residential care-homes will be supplied with mouth-nose protective equipment as hospitals and doctor surgeries. 
The health authority will put in place a task force to support authorities and care-and-nursing-homes in combating COVID-19. 
As far as available, all people in residential care-settings should be wearing mouth-nose protection.
Following RKI guidance, mouth-nose protective equipment can be reused if resources are scarce. 
If no single use disposable smock available, reusable smock can be used.
They need to be washed in a disinfection laundry process.
Brandenburg has received 2 million mouth-nose protective equipment and 80,000 litres of disinfection liquid. 
In Brandenburg police distributes the supply. 
The provision of material was organised through the "task force supply" of ministry coordination-group "Corona" of the government of Brandenburg. 
Suppliers of protective equipment can register their offers with the police on a dedicated website, so that they can be purchased and organised centrally.
Weekly improvement of equipment available; production of equipment in Mecklenburg Vorpommern starting.
The company Dr Feist Automotive Bielefeld GmbH (DFA Bielefeld) has been commissioned by the state government of North-Rhine Westphalia to produce Million mouth-nose protective masks. 
From 8 April until 29 July the company will deliver 320,000 masks to the state government on a daily basis for a cost of around €17 Million.
The protective masks are being distributed to care-settings via local authorities and communal crisis teams.
So far (8 April) the Health Ministry of North-Rhine-Westfalia has distributed 3.7 million protective masks, 1.7 million gloves, 78,000 protective gowns, 3,000 safety goggles, 250,000 test tubes and 22,000 litres of disinfectant.
Protective equipment so far has been distributed through the Authority for Social Aspects, Youth and Care (Landesamt-für-Soziales,-Jugend-und-Versorgung) to health and care-settings that experienced shortages. 
Now a regular supply will be provided. 
Prior to the delivery each institution was presented with an overview of materials allocated and had the opportunity to alter the figures according to need. 
Many institutions have lowered the number of equipment needed.
The Ministry of Health as provided 11,200 FFP2 masks (30-March) and 30,00 simple surgery masks (3-April) to the Saarland Society of Care.
Special controls by the Saarland authority for residential care (saarländische-Heimaufsicht) are planned. 
This is supposed to check the occupancy of the institution and staffing. 
If relevant, this may have to be controlled in the premises.
The Red Cross has distributed 182,000 mouth-nose protective mask provided by the federal government in equal shares to the different districts from where they can be further distributed (1-April).
Protective equipment in Thuringia is ordered centrally to the office for consumer protection (Landesamt für Vebraucherschutz). 
Information on the supply needed is regularly obtained. 
In the care-sector, supply is distributed through organisations such as the Red Cross.
New residents and residents returning from hospital should be treated as persons suspected of COVID-19.
The 14-days “quarantine care” can also take place in other care-settings should the care-or-nursing-home be unable to meet the quarantine requirements.
Since 4-April-2020 care-and-nursing-homes in Bavaria do not take on any new residents.
Exceptions can only be made if the institution can ensure that the new resident can be quarantined for 14-days and if the relevant health authority agrees to the arrangement.
Return from residents following hospitalisation is also only allowed if the person can be isolated for 14-days and if there is sufficient protective equipment available. 
Otherwise the person has to go into short-term care-settings, such as in rehabilitation hospitals where this care can be provided in the form of short-term care.
The Senate Administration for Health, Care and Equality Berlin points out that people discharged from hospitals into institutional care-settings cannot be routinely tested due to limited capacity. 
It is further noted that a negative test result at the point of discharge does not mean that a person not showing symptoms (without respiratory infection) will not develop symptoms later on. 
For this reason, it is not suggested that nursing-homes should stop receiving people discharged from hospitals that have not been tested (6-April-2020).
Unless care-homes have received order to stop taking on new residents or they have no capacity they are expected to take in new residents.
Before receiving a new resident, the relevant doctor has to confirm that a negative COVID-19 test has been obtained relevant to the timing of entering the care-setting.
Care-and-nursing-homes are not allowed to accept new residents.
Exceptions can be made if care-homes can ensure that the new residents will be accommodated separately from other residents and kept in quarantine.
People discharged from hospitals can be discharged into care-settings or rehabilitation clinics that have been prepared for this type of care and have been approved for the provision of short-term care. 
Other exceptions are possible following communication with the health authority.
This new rule was issued following the COVID-19 outbreak in a care-and-nursing-home in Wolfsburg.
There are around 80 rehabilitation hospitals that can support the care of people with care-needs.
Care-and-nursing-homes can accept new residents as long as the care-setting can ensure that the new residents will be placed under quarantine for 14-days.
The hospitals are responsible to test the persons discharged to residential care-setting for COVID-19. 
Hospitals also have inform receiving care or nursing about possible COVID-19 symptoms in writing. 
Tests should be marked for priority testing.
New residents have to be tested for COVID-19. 
Tests should be marked for priority testing.
In general people who have newly entered or returned to a residential care-setting should be placed in quarantine or isolation from other residents for 14-days in areas appropriate in size to the number of resident.
It is planned that those infected and people without symptoms, but without a negative test result, will be housed separately.
Care-staff who are only look after people in the isolated or quarantined areas will be tested by the company doctor depending on risk. 
As above, these tests should receive priority.
People discharged from hospital can return to their care-or-nursing-homes unless there is an explicit stop or if there is no capacity in the receiving care-setting.
Isolation and quarantine areas need to be prepared for new residents and those returning following hospitalisation.
The plannable admission of new residents should be reduced or paused to enable capacity for COVID-19 patients.
All new admission to care-and-nursing-homes immediately require testing for COVID19.
These tests should be prioritised.
When residents did not have a COVID-19 infection/suspected infection a written statement responding to three questions is required by the hospital/relative:
Q1: Has the person been in an at risk area within the last 14-days?
Q2: Has the person had contact to a person suspected of or with a confirmed COVID-19 infection in the last 14-days?
Q3: Has the person had symptoms during the last 48 hours that could indicate a COVDI-19 infection?
It is recommended that residents should stay in a single room for ideally 14-days, but at least for 7-days.
The health status of the staff should be monitored. (RKI recommendations, 20-May-2020).
Medical staff working with confirmed COVID-19-cases are encouraged to maintain a diary in which they record self-checking of symptoms (examples of diary are available on the RKI website). 
The RKI recommends (at least) daily documentation of clinical symptoms among residents and staff. 
The minimum symptoms to be monitored include fever (>37.8°C), coughing, shortness of breath, sore throats and sniffing. 
Additional symptoms to be monitored include muscular and joint pain, headaches, nausea/vomiting, diarrhoea, loss of appetite, weight loss, conjunctivitis, skin rash, apathy and somnolence.
This information should be put together with other relevant information of the individuals. 
Templates for the monitoring will soon be provided. 
Residents and staff should be encouraged to self-report if they experience respiratory symptoms or they feel feverish.
People with care-needs in in residential care-settings and those living at home in receipt of domiciliary care should have a daily temperature check (for those receiving multiple domiciliary care-visits at each visit). 
Novel coughs, change in breathing frequency and hoarseness are to be document. 
If pathological changes are being observed the relevant GP should be contacted. 
If symptoms occur the person with care-needs should be isolated as far as possible.
One medical doctor in charge of testing for a whole institution that can respond quickly if necessary. 
Tests can only be conducted if there is a reasonable suspicion of an infection (following RKI recommendations). 
All residents and staff that develop symptoms should be tested as soon as possible. 
Residents should also be tested if they develop unspecific symptoms or if their general state is deteriorating. 
As soon as there is awareness of an infection, contact persons (category 1) will be tested. 
If there are several cases, other asymptomatic residents and staff can be tested.
If there a suspicion that there may be several persons infected within one care-or-nursing-home, testing among residents and staff should happen immediately.
Bavaria pursues the strategy to test persons where there is a reasonable suspicion that they may have a COVID-19 infection and their contact persons. 
Staff working in health and long-term care should be prioritised.
If there is a suspected COVID-19-case, residents to be isolated in their room in the care-setting until testing result available (currently it takes 1-day). 
If close contacts are being tested depends on the situation and will be decided on a case by case basis. 
Staff who have been classed as close contact and who are needed in care will be tested.
If a COVID-19 infection has been confirmed in a resident or member of staff, the care-provider is required to test all care-recipient and all staff immediately for COVID019 and to repeat this at a useful time interval.
If staff shortage, quick testing of staff if there have been cases; staff from other institutions (i.e. closed day care-centres) can be used.
Preventing testing of care-home staff to be increased (20.04.2010). 
Priority testing of symptomatic patients & testing of care-and-nursing-homes and ambulatory carers if they are possible contact of a COVID-19 case.
Staff that is only working in quarantine or isolation area, will depending on risk be tested by the company doctor. 
These samples are to be prioritised. 
The company doctor (or other relevant doctors) need to ensure that staff working in the isolation and quarantine areas depending on risk are being tested for COVID-19.
If a resident is diagnosed with COVID-19, all other residents that had contact with that person 48 prior to the development of initial symptoms need also be communicate to the local health authority. 
The local health authority is in charge of allocating the risk categorisation for each contact.
If there are more than two cases in one care-home all residents should ideally be accommodated in single rooms, particularly if they are in the high-risk-group.
Screening of all staff can be considered. All organisational-measures need to be coordinated with the local health authority.
If a member of staff is urgently needed but has had contact with a COVID-19-case or experiences symptoms, they need to have swabs taken on day 3,5 and 7 as well as day 14. 
In addition, they need to wear mouth-nose protection, which has to be changed at least every 2 hours or as soon as it becomes moist.
According to a news report the health ministry Saarland and the University hospital Homburg have developed a concept to test all resident and staff in care-and-nursing-homes. 
They are starting with 116 out of 157 care-and-nursing-homes. 
The residents will be checked twice (one-week time difference between tests) and staff continuously twice per week. 
The initiative starts with care-settings that so far have not experienced COVID-19-cases.
The testing of residents will be conducted by staff in the care-and-nursing-home. 
The staff have received specific online training. 
The swabs are supposed to be done using a procedure developed by institutes that reduce the amount of material required. 
As soon as an anti-body test becomes available, carers and residents shall we tested as a second step.
If there is a COVID-19 infection among staff or residents in a residential care-setting, all staff with possible and all residents will be tested. 
If there is spatial separation between groups, only those in the affected group will be tested, otherwise the whole institution requires testing. 
Testing is coordinated through the relevant health authority.
If a carer experiences symptoms, they have to be tested before starting their shift. 
Until results have arrived the person is only allowed to work wearing protective equipment. 
If residents show symptoms they need to be tested immediately (17-April-2020).
The federal state of Saxony carries the costs for testing. 
Costs of tests for residents and care-staff with symptoms are covered by the GKV. 
If tests are requested without there having been a positive case, the institution carries the cost.
Comprehensive testing of all people living and working in residential care-settings.
The Federal State of Saarland together with the University Homburg have initiated comprehensive testing of all people living and working in residential care-settings. 
Since 21-April over 20,000-people have been tested. 
All 130 care-settings that have been tested were free of COVID-19. 
A second round was started in the week of 12-May.
The RKI guidelines also recommend contact tracing of contact persons in cooperation with the local health authority.
The local health authority has to be informed about each suspected and confirmed-case of COVID-19 has.
The RKI recommends that all contacts a COVID-19-case has had until up to two-days before symptoms began should be listed.
Category 1 contacts are people that have cumulatively been exposed to at least 15 minutes face-to-face contact or where there has been direct contact of secretion or body fluids of the infected person (for medical and care personnel exposure without protective equipment). 
These contacts are deemed as at high-risk of having been infected. Their details will be registered with the health authority and there will be a follow-up investigation. 
Category 1 contacts will be asked to isolate at home away from other household members, to maintain frequent handwashing and coughing etiquette, to monitor their body temperature twice-a-day, to keep a diary and to inform the relevant health authority on a daily basis.
If this person previously was registered as a COVID-19-case, they can be considered as category contact. 
If there are no symptoms, where possible testing should be undertaken 5-7 following the first contact to the confirmed-case. 
If the exact contact time is unknown testing on day 1-and-7-10-days following the contact tracing is recommended. 
This advice is also given for specific circumstances, such as for people in care-and-nursing-homes.
Category 2 contacts are people that had less than 15 minutes face-to-face contact (i.e. people in the same room) and that had no direct contact to secretion or body fluids. 
The health authority is not required to register the contact's name, but may provide information on the disease and routes of infection. 
Category 2 contacts should reduce contacts to third parties where possible, they should maintain hand hygiene and adhere to coughing etiquette, they should check for symptoms once-a-day and maintain a diary. 
If contacts develop symptoms they must self-isolate, contact the health authority and may be require medical consultation and adhere to advice from the health authority.
Category 3 contacts are medical/care staff that had contact with a confirmed-case (≤2m, for example while providing care or as part of a medical examination) while wearing adequate protective equipment throughout the entire contact time as well as medical staff with contact (>2m) without direct contact with secretion, excretions or aerosol exposure.
Testing for this at-risk population should be done at a low threshold (more details in the guidance document) and the local health authority is to be informed regarding suspected, confirmed and deceased cases of COVID-19. 
In collaboration with the local health authority regular testing (e.g. twice per week) could be implemented to monitor the ongoing situation in the institution.
RKI recommendations for care-workers Under regular staffing levels, staff identified as contact person category 1 (higher-risk of infection = at least 15 minutes face-to-face contact with a COVID-19-case and/or direct contact to body fluids or secretion) have to isolate at home for 14-days. 
This includes physical distancing from other household members, regular handwashing and adhering to coughing and sneezing hygiene rules. 
Until the 14th-day of isolation, contact persons in category 1 must monitor their temperature twice-a-day, maintain a diary and inform the local health authority on a daily basis.
A person identified as risk-category 2 (low-risk = less than 15 minutes face-to-face contact with a COVID-19-case and no direct contact to body fluids or secretion) can continue to work with mouth and nose protection as long as they don't develop any symptoms. 
Staff in risk-category 2 will be asked to monitor and document their health for up to 14-days after exposure. 
They should strictly adhere to all hygiene recommendations and where possible maintain a distance of at least 1.5-metres from others, including during breaks. 
If they develop symptoms, there should be an immediate test.
Staff without contact with an infected person, but who exhibit symptoms of a cold, should stay at home and can only start working if they have been symptom-free for at least 48 hours. 
If possible, they should be tested for COVID-19.
In the case of any of the staff testing positive for COVID-19 they should stay at home in quarantine for at least the time they experience symptoms or for 14-days. 
They can start working again once they have been symptom-free for 48 hours and had two negative tests 24 hours apart.
In case of staff shortage, the recommendations only change for staff identified as risk-category 1. 
These staff should then stay at home and quarantine for at least seven-days but can return to work afterwards if they remain symptom free and wear mouth-nose-protection during the entire time they spend at work.
Otherwise the routines continues as for staff identified as risk-category 2.
Schleswig-Holstein will support their health authorities with €5 million over the next 12-months. 
This should enable the recruitment of 100 new members of staff. 
The additional staff members could support contact tracing activities.
If there is evidence of COVID-19 in an institution, the institution (space and staff) should be separated into three areas: one area for those without symptoms and without contact with affected people; one area for those with suspected-cases (residents showing symptoms or who have been in close contact with infected residents) who have not yet had test results; and one area for people who have tested positive for COVID-19. 
The guidance states that should additional infectious diseases be prevalent (e.g. influenza), additional areas need to be established. 
Staff should only be working in one of the designated areas (RKI 20-May-2020).
Residents that have tested positive or are suspected of having COVID-19, residents with symptoms and their contacts should be moved into single rooms, ideally with their own wet room. 
These residents must not participate in activities with residents that have tested negative (RKI 20-May-2020).
Staff supporting residents with suspected and confirmed-cases should be trained and not be asked to care for others (RKI 20-May-2020).
To stop chains of infections, affected residents should immediately be isolated and/or those who have become ill should be moved into hospitals or other institutions.
The health authority in Lower-Saxony (Landesgesundheitsamt-Niedersachsen) on 17-March recommended that care-and-nursing-homes strictly separate those suspected of COVID-19 and non-infected residents.
Removing residents who test positive to quarantine centres.
Removing residents without symptoms of COVID19 to other accommodation.
In Saxony 53 institutions have been prepared to provide short-term care in case-care-or-nursing-homes are being placed under quarantine (3-April-2020).
1,400 nursing-homes in Lower-Saxony have received tablets to enable regular medical consultation by video call. 
This reduces the risk of infection and support maintaining residents' health. 
In addition, the tablets are anticipated to be used for social calls with the residents' families.
Lower-Saxony pays around €200,000 to supply the tables and the platform used for the medical consultations. 
General Practitioners involved receive the necessary software free of charge.
Nursing-homes interested in this initiative can apply until 30-June-2020.
Only guidelines from Baden-Württemberg have been found to specifically reflect on the issue of the use of advanced directives. 
They state that if a resident develops a severe form of COVID-19, the advance directive to exclude artificial respiration should be considered critically as an infection, such as COVID-19 and its related survival and recovery chances, may not have been considered by the person when signing the document.
The second law for the protection of the population during an epidemic situation of national significance (zweites-Gesetz-zum-Schutz-der-Bevölkerung-bei-einer epidemischen-Lage-von-nationaler-Tragweite) outlines that all people employed in old age care will be able to make a staggered claim on a one-off bonus payment (Corona-Prämie) of up to €1,000. 
The highest bonus payment will be made to full-time staff providing direct care and support. 
The social care-insurance will reimburse employers for the bonus initially. 
During the second half 2020 the Federal Ministry of Health (Bundesministerium-für-Gesundheit) and the Federal Ministry of Finance (Bundesministerium-für-Finanzen) will decide over the extent of a government grant for health and care-insurances to enable the stabilisation of the contributions rate. 
The federal states and employers in care can increase the one-off bonus up to the tax and social security tax free amount of €1,500.
On 7-April-2020, it was reported that the Bavarian cabinet had decided that around 250,000 paid carers working in care-and-nursing-homes as well as in care settings for people with special needs will receive a single payment of €500 (tax-free) in recognition of the work they have been providing during the pandemic. 
This will cost the federal state of Bavaria €126 million. 
As part of the updated measures, the Bavarian Ministry for Healthcare announced that care-workers in care-and-nursing-homes, hospitals, rehabilitation hospitals, care-settings for people with specials needs, ambulatory care-services and ambulance staff who regularly work more than 25 hours per week can apply to receive €500. 
Those regularly working 25 hours or fewer per week can apply to receive €300. 
This money comes out of a special fond put together to respond to COVID-19.
On 14 May, Hamburg announced that long-term care-workers will receive a one-off care-bonus of up to €1,500. 
In Hamburg around 25,400 employees will receive the bonus. 
Hamburg will contribute about €8.2 million.
On 19 May the federal state of Rhineland-Palatinate announced that they will top up the bonus payment for care-workers up to €1,500. 
There are around 55,000 care-workers employed in long-term care-settings for older-people in Rhineland-Pfalz. 
The costs of the carer bonus payment for the federal states is estimated to amount to between 18 and 22 Million Euro.
On 13-May, the federal government of Saarland has announced to increase the one-off care-bonus by €500 so that care-workers in long-term care for older-people can receive up to €1,500.
It has been reported that In Schleswig-Holstein all 20,000 care-workers will receive a COVID-19 care-bonus of €1,500. 
The government will pay this out of its own household if no nationwide agreement can be arranged.
On 23-April the German government announced minimum wage for nursing assistants will be increased from 1-May-2020 to 1-April-2022 in four steps until they reach €12,55 across Germany. 
Qualified assistants that have undergone a one-year apprenticeship will receive a minimum wage of €12,50 (West) or €12,20 (East) as of 1-April-2021. 
From 1-April-2022 minimum wage across Germany for this group will be €13,20.
For care-workers with three-year apprenticeship minimum wage will be €15 as of 1-April-2021. 
This will increase to €15,40 by 1-April-2022. 
In addition to the vacation days workers are legally entitled to, all care-workers will receive additional paid days off.
An initiative across federal states has created the website 'Pflegereserve' where people with a care-related qualification but not currently working in this area can register. 
They can be connected to health and long-term care-settings in their area that experience staff shortages.
'Carepool' (Pflegepool): Since 23-March Bavaria has a website where people who have a qualification or experience in health and social care, that do not fall into an increased risk-group and are not currently actively employed in care-related jobs can register. 
The volunteers are being allocated centrally according to need. 
Volunteers employed in other jobs will be freed from their duty and continue to receive their income; the self-employed will receive compensation for their loss of business.
People with a qualification in a care-related profession from abroad will be receiving priority over other health related qualification when applying for permission to work in Germany.
Over 400 newly qualified care-professionals could be employed in Berlin as examinations could be completed following RKI recommendations.
In Bremen people with health and care-qualifications are encouraged to register with the city government. 
This doesn't mean that they have to work in care-related jobs. 
It offers the opportunity to contact potential additional support in case of staff shortages.
People are also encouraged to register with volunteering portals.
The nursing council Rhineland-Palatinate encourages care-professionals (people with relevant qualifications) to register with the care-pool in Rhineland-Palatinate. 
Service providers urgently requiring staff can contact the care-insurances. 
They, together with the advice and auditing authority assess the situation. 
Following this people registered from the 'volunteer pool' can be allocated. 
Currently there are 344 persons registered in the pool.
The health minister in North-Rhine-Westphalia suggested on 19-May that people undertaking a one-year apprenticeship to become a care-assistant (Pflegeassistenz) should be required to receive a regulated training allowance. 
So far apprentices in hospitals rceive such allowance, while for apprentices in long-term care-settings this remains unregulated.
The minister emphasises the important of ensuring qualified care-workers to ensure the provision of quality long-term care in future.
In addition, the government of North-Rhine-Westphalia is planning on streamlining the qualification so that those who would like to obtain further qualifications can use the one-year apprenticeship as a recognised building block.
On 27-March the German Ministry of Health (Bundesgesundheitsministerium) announced a funding and support package to help care-institutions during the COVID-19 pandemic. 
The measures outlined include that in order to maintain the provision of care, institutional care-settings will be allowed to deviate from certain rules and operational frameworks around staffing level.
The Bavarian Minister for Healthcare and the Bavarian Minister of Finance announced that the catering for all staff in health and care-setting (hospital, care-or-nursing-homes) will be financially supported (€6.50 per member of staff per day) as a sign of appreciation of their role in responding to the pandemic (as of 1-April-2020).
Psychological support to care-home staff who may have experienced traumatic situations.
Baden-Württemberg is relaxing the ban of visitors in care-and-nursing-homes.
So far close relatives were allowed to visit their relatives in residential care-settings under appropriate measures to prevent infection (i.e. wearing of protective equipment) if the resident otherwise would have suffered physical or mental damage through social isolation.
From 18 May onwards each resident can have one visit of a maximum of two persons (There can be exceptions for people at the end-of-life) and the care-setting can put a time limit to the length of a visit. 
If a wish to visit cannot be accommodated, the institution has to offer an alternative within reasonable time.
Visits can only take place in a resident's room, a visitor room or other suitable areas for visitors. 
Care-settings can ban visits in a resident's room if other suitable visitor areas are available. 
Care-settings should enable visits in the resident's room for a bedridden person, a person with special needs or visitors of a person nearing the end-of-life.
People wishing to visit a person living in a care-setting should notify the care-setting to enable visitor management. 
It is not possible to visit a person in a care-setting without the approval of the institution.
Visitors will need to be registered by the care-setting in case contact tracing becomes necessary.
Visitors can only enter care-settings following disinfection of their hands. 
Visitors also need to wear a mouth-nose protecting during their entire visit in the care-setting unless there are health reasons or other important reasons why they cannot do this.
Visitor will need to keep at least 1.5-metres distance to persons within the care-setting, unless they visit a person nearing the end-of-life.
Care-setting have to produce a, institution specific concepts for visitors that outlines how visits can take place taking local conditions into consideration.
From 18-May professional visits to care-settings through hairdressers, physiotherapists or speech therapists or for pastoral visits can take place provided appropriate protective-measures are in place and the care-settings agrees to these visits.
In Bavaria the ban of visits in residential care-settings was lifted on 9 May. 
Residents are allowed to have one visit per day from a close family member or a further designated person at a fixed time. 
Visitors need to wear a mask and have to, where possible, maintain at least 1.5-metres distance. 
In addition, care-settings need to develop a protection and hygiene concept.
People living in residential care-settings in Berlin can have one visitor per day. 
Visitors with respiratory illness are not allowed to visit. 
Providers of residential care-settings can limit visiting rules of ban visits should a COVID-19-case be confirmed within the care-setting. 
Limitations on visiting rules need to be made in accordance with the relevant health authority and need to be limited in time.
Severely ill and dying people can have visitors without restrictions. 
Similarly, visitors are not limited for people in hospices.
People living in residential care-settings in Brandenburg can have one visitors if it can be ensured that entrance to care-settings is managed and unnecessary physical contact between visitors, residents and staff can be avoided and as far as possible effective protection of residents from infection can be ensured (since 9-May). 
These limitations do not apply to seriously ill-people and those nearing the end-of-life and for visits for therapeutic or pastoral reasons. 
People with respiratory illness cannot visit a residential care-setting and visits can be banned if a COVID-19-case if confirmed within the care-setting. 
All people must adhere to instructions by the care-setting and existing hygiene plans.
People living in residential care-settings in Bremen can have one visitor per week for a maximum of 45 minutes (the visitor cannot change). 
There has to be an agreed appointment for a visit. 
Both visitor and resident must not display COVID-19 related symptoms, visitors must be at least 16-years-old, have registered when entering the care-setting, have received information on hygiene practices and this has been documented and staff must be present when resident and visitor meet. 
Visitors have to disinfect their hands when entering an leaving the care-setting. 
Visitors are not allowed to bring food and food and drinks cannot be consumed during the visit. 
Visits should ideally not take place in the resident's room; sufficiently large rooms should be made available. 
This does not apply if residents are bedbound or have specific special needs. 
Residents can have contact with one visitor in the outdoor area of the care-facility if hygiene and distance rules as well as regulations of the care-setting are maintained.
From 19-May every person living in residential care-settings is allowed to have one chosen person visiting them once a week for at least one hour. 
Further visits by this person up to a maximum of two hours per week can be permitted by the care-provider. 
Visits of people at the-end-of-life should be allowed. 
Visitors are only allowed to enter the care-setting with an appointment and following registration. 
The care-provider is responsible that only as many visitors are allowed that hygiene and distance rules can be maintained. 
Visitors need to be registered to enable contact tracing. 
Visitors must confirm that they have not knowingly been in contact with a COVID-19-case, they themselves have not been tested positively for COVID-19 and do not currently have symptoms of a respiratory illness. 
Children younger than 14-years, people with respiratory symptoms and people who are Contact persons category 1 or 2 following RKI contacting tracing advice are not allowed to enter care-settings.
Visitors are only allowed in the outside area or specifically determined areas for visits. 
Resident's rooms are only be allowed to be entered by visitors due to limited mobility of the residents or due other reasons why the resident cannot attend visitor areas. 
Care-providers need to provide opportunities for hand disinfection in dedicated meeting areas and surfaces (doors, doorknobs..) that frequently get touched by visitors need to be cleaned repeatedly during the day. 
Care-providers need to ensure that contact between visitors and other residents is minimised. 
If available, it would be advised to use separate entrances and to provide dedicated routes within the care-setting. 
Visitors need to be informed in writing, with signs and orally at their first visit of required hygiene-measures. 
Visitors need to wear mouth-nose protection during their entire time in the residential care-setting.
Care-providers need to develop a care-setting specific visitor concept and to adjust their hygiene concept accordingly.
There is no restriction for therapeutic, medical, judicial or pastoral visitors if they wear mouth-nose protection from entering to leaving the care-setting, unless these people are contact persons of category 1 or 2 (RKI guidance).
In Hessen each resident can have visit per week for one hour by one relative or a person that is important to them if the residential care-setting has a concept to protect residents from infection through visitors and a hygiene plan. 
The contact details and visiting times of each visitor need to be documented.
Visits are not allowed to take place if a COVID-19-case is confirmed within a care-setting.
During their visit, visitors must maintain a distance of at least 1.50m to the resident, wear a mouth-nose protection provided by the care-setting or accepted by them (at least surgery mask) and follow the hygiene rules set out by the care-setting. 
These rules do not apply to people visiting a person at the end-of-life.
Visitors who have entered Germany by land, sea or air are not allowed to enter residential care-settings in Hessen.
From 15 May residents of residential care-settings are allowed to have one fixed visitor per day for a maximum of one hour.
The care-setting has to have developed an infection protection concept and can ensure the maintenance of hygiene standards. 
These measures have been communicated with the local health authority.
Every visitor is required to provide their contact details on their first visit and visiting times at consecutive visits.
Every visitor needs to be informed or relevant protective and hygiene-measures before their first contact with the resident they visit.
The visitor needs to confirm that they are symptom free ahead of each visit.
The care-settings needs to maintain a daily symptom diary for residents and staff.
Provided there is no active COVID-19 infection in the care-setting.
Already since 17-April visits in residential care-settings are possible in Lower Saxony if they are in line with individual and hygiene concepts approved by the local health authority. 
From 27-May onwards residents will have the right to have visits by one named person. 
Adherence to strict hygiene rules needs to be maintained. 
The regulation is due to be implemented on 20-May.
In North-Rhine Westphalia the ban for visitors was lifted in time for mother's day on 10-May. 
Visits will be made possible through separate visiting areas, protective equipment and screening of visitors.
Residents can have up to two visitors in separate visiting rooms. 
If the visits need to take place in the resident's room only one visitor can be permitted. 
The length per visit will be limited to a maximum of two hours per visit per day.
All visitors will be registered, screened briefly for COVID-19 and informed about relevant protective-measures.
Visits in residential care-settings are possible since 7-May. 
Resident can have one hour-long visit per day from a relative or otherwise close person. 
Visitors need to wear mouth-nose protection during the visit, disinfect their hands and maintain a distance of at least 1.4-metres.
In addition, residents are allowed to leave the care-setting on their own, accompanied by a relative or other resident, if they are not infected with COVID-19.
Since 4-May residents in residential care-settings can meet relatives and friends outdoors. 
During the visits everyone needs to adhere to 1.5-metres distancing rule and wear a mouth-nose protection.
Visits inside the residential care-setting are only possible if the care-provider has provided a protection concept. 
This may involve specific visiting areas within the care-setting with plexiglass panes.
The update regulations allow one registered visitor per resident per day for up to one hour. 
Visitors need to adhere to protective-measures and information on hygiene-measures needs to take place regularly.
In Saxony visitors are only allowed to visit residents in long-term care-settings following registration and approval. 
Entrance depends on adherence to hygiene and organisational measures put in place by the care-provider. 
Visitors need to be limit in numbers and time. 
The care-provider can coordinate the implementation of measures with the local health authority.
Residents can meet visitors outdoors as long as they adhere to distancing and hygiene rules. 
This regulation only applies if there are no reasons against allowing these visits, such as quarantine-measures. 
Residents are not allowed to spend time at another place (i.e. a relative's flat) unless they have received prior approval by the care-provider.
On 20-May Saxony announced enable visits in residential long-term care-settings for close relatives.
From 11 May residents in long-term care-settings were allowed to have one visit per day for one hour. 
Children younger than 16-years, people with respiratory illness cannot be permitted, people with a COVID-19 infection, people identified as contact persons category 1 and 2 (RKI) or who have been abroad (14-days since return).
Hygiene and distancing rules must be adhered to during visits. 
The management of the residential care-setting can limit or ban visits following a risk assessment. 
The relevant authority needs to be informed if a visitor ban is invoked.
Visits for legal, pastoral, therapeutic or medical reasons are allowed.
All visitors need to wear medical mouth-nose protection.
Schleswig-Holstein announced plans to allow visitors in residential settings already on 30-April.
All residential care-settings need to develop a concept for visitors for each specific care-setting based on current regulations. 
The relevant health authority needs to be informed about the concept for visitors.
Residents can only have one visitor (under specific circumstances one additional person may be allowed to accompany the visitor). 
Visits need to be defined for a specific period (maximal 2 hours per day). 
The number of visitors permitted at the same time depends on the size of the care-setting as distancing and hygiene rules need to be adhered to. 
The entrance ways to the care-setting need to be limited (ideally only one entrance). 
Visitors should only be allowed in specific areas and should be signposted along specific routes. 
Visits need to be arranged telephonically.
Visitors with acute respiratory illness and fever are not permitted. 
Hygiene and distancing rules need to be communicated appropriately and maintained.
Disinfectant and information on their use must be available at the entrance. 
Visitors must register prior to the visit and sign that they will adhere to hygiene and distancing rules during their visit. 
If visitors do fail to adhere to these rules following a reminder, staff can ask visitors to leave and invoke a visitor ban for the relevant person. 
Gifts and exchange of laundry needs to be agreed with the member of staff responsible for hygiene. 
Visitors and residents (if possible) must wear mouth-nose protection. 
Bins must be available for single-use items. 
Visitors should be guided by a member of staff or a specially trained person to the visitor room.
The document provides guidance on ideal location, arrangement and organisation of visitor rooms. 
If it is not possible to use the visitor room, visits can take place in the resident's room under following a set of precautions.
Since 13 May residents in residential care-settings in Thuringia are allowed to have one registered visitor per resident per day for one to two hours.
Visits are not allowed from people younger than 16-years, people with respiratory illness, people who are contact persons to a COVID-19-case (RKI). 
Visits are not allowed if there is a current COVID-19 infection within the care-setting.
Staff that has been travelling from a high-risk area within the last 14-days should not be working. 
Staff with respiratory symptoms are not allowed to work. 
In these cases, there should be testing for COVID-19.
If no single use disposable gown available, reusable gown can be used. 
They need to be washed in a disinfection laundry process.
It can be useful to have the same staff on the same routes and to avoid rotation. 
Visiting COVID-19 patients at the end of the tour could reduce the risk of spreading (not obligatory).
Care and support that doesn't require physical contact should be performed following hand disinfection and by maintaining 2m distance. 
While these activities take place the person with care-needs should be in a different room.
Personal care should be performed following hand disinfection with gloves and mouth-nose protection. 
During the care the carer should not speak with the care-recipient.
Length and extent of the tasks should be based on need and patient protection.
Ambulatory care-workers in Brandenburg have received special permission until 30-June-2020 to park in certain restricted areas for up to two hours while they provide care-services.
Contact between carer and care-recipient needs to be minimised as professionally required; the number of carers per care-recipient should be minimised.
Care-staff has to reduce contact among each other as much as possible.
Care-recipients and their household should be reminded not to have receive visitors. 
If other members of the household become ill they should consequently adhere to prevention-measures or if that no possible wear mouth nose protection. 
Care-recipients and their household members or other unpaid carers should inform the ambulatory care-services if there is a suspicion of a potential COVID-19 infection.
In case of staff shorting, ambulatory services should make use of the extended regulation around working hours, use staff from other parts of the organisation, use agency staff, indicate need for staff to health authority.
If ambulatory services are unable to provide all care-services needed, they should explore whether some care-recipients may be able to receive care from family members.
Care-service points may be able to support families in navigating support structures; the relevant authority should be informed in these cases.
Care-staff can be allocated to work in ambulatory as well as residential care-setting to enable great flexibility in planning.
If relative or others are to take on medical care-tasks this needs to be coordinated with the relevant medical doctor and the care-recipient.
If medical care-services cannot be provided the provider needs to inform the care-recipient or their legal carer, the prescribing GP and the health insurance immediately.
The ambulance services are to be contacted in medical emergencies.
A newspaper report stated that ambulatory care-providers in Thuringia struggle as the number of clients drop. 
In many cases, relatives are staying home due to the COVID-19 pandemic and take on relevant care-tasks. 
This may in part be to reduce financial costs in the family but also to reduce the risk of infection. 
Several providers already had to apply for reduced work hours (Kurzarbeit) to get their companies through this situation.
On 27-March the German Ministry of Health (Bundesgesundheitsministerium) announced a funding and support package to help care-institutions during the COVID-19 pandemic. 
The measures outlined include that the care-insurance providers will additionally support providers to avoid gaps in supply of paid home care.
On 3-March, the National Association of Statutory Health Insurance Funds (GKV Spitzenverband) issued a statement on the rescue package to support care-providers during the pandemic.
Guidance for care-workers to support people with intellectual disabilities and adults in the autistic spectrum.
Measures to support care-workers of people with intellectual disabilities and autistic adults.
Thuringia and Berlin are starting an initiative to increase the basic security pay for people in need. 
This recognises that people that usually rely on support of food banks and other supportive interventions cannot access these services, which may make life even more expensive. This top-up will benefit people of all ages.
The federal government has enabled a law to make the use of short-term work easier for long-term care-providers. 
Only 10 per cent of employees of a company need to be affected by loss of work for the company/service provider to apply for short-term work.
On 14 May the federal government agreed the second law for the protection of the population during an epidemic situation of national significance (zweites-Gesetz-zum-Schutz-der-Bevölkerung-bei-einer-epidemischen-Lage-von-nationaler-Tragweite). 
This law includes additional provisions for unpaid carers
Under normal circumstance family members can receive up to 10-days financial support to compensate for a loss of income if a sudden care-need emerges within the family and the person needs to organise care in the community. 
The new law will apply until 30-September-2020 and will provide family carers with care-support money (Pflegeunterstützungsgeld) for up to 20-days in situations where a gap in the community care their relative normally receives occurs.
The right to stay away from work due to an acute care-situation within the own family will also be extended from 10-to-20-days until 30-September-2020. 
Additional measures to make the caregiver leave act (Pflegezeitgesetz) the family care-leave-act (Familienpflegezeitgesetz) more flexible to respond to the pandemic are being undertaken.
For 20-years there have been specialist agencies in Bavaria to provide advice for unpaid carers. 
These agencies have been advised to be available via telephone and e-mail.
Testing only if there is a reasonable suspicion (symptoms & contact to COVID-19-case or recent stay in an at risk area in the past 14-days.
There are a number of neighbourhood initiatives that offer support.
Sources of support for people with care-needs and unpaid carers are care-support centres.
These centres offer neutral advice free of charge. 
These services currently only happen over the telephone. 
The availability of these services has been extended in terms of hours and is also available on Sunday and on bank holidays.
AOK (sickness fund) care-academic: the provision of advice on care at home during the COVID-19 pandemic.
Voluntary visits to people with care-needs had to stop, however, contact is maintained via telephone and advice also remains available.
Care in distress, this source of advice can help people experiencing violence of conflict in their care. 
The hours for advice have been extended to support unpaid carers during this period.
Silvernet - A telephone support service for lonely and isolated-people.
During the COVID-19 pandemic (until 31.05.2020) people with care-needs in their everyday life can now also receive financial support for services they receive telephonically. 
This services has been put in place to enable people with care-needs to live independently for as long as possible and to provide support for unpaid carers.
The minister of social affairs explains that support to enable everyday life for people with care-needs usually is offered through group interventions or hourly support in their own home. 
Due to the risk of infection this is currently not possible. 
Some of this contact time, however, could alternatively be provided via telephone or virtually to reduce the risk of social isolation.
People with care-needs (levels 1 to 5) and are living at home can claim up to €125 per month from their care-insurance for support or for relief of their unpaid carer. 
Those with care level 2 to 5 can use up to 40 per cent of the value of in-kind support to finance support with daily living. 
This money can be saved up over several months and moved forward into the other half of the calendar year. 
This funding can be used for group or individual support, household help, company to go shopping, company for administrative, medical or religious appointments, support to enable social contacts, company to attend cultural events or other leisure activities. 
Due to COVID-19 eligible services have been expanded to 'services to the front door' (shopping, running errands, pick-up or delivery services, organisation of administrative matters, personal conversations via telephone, skype or e-mail) until 30.9.2020.
In addition, requirements for reimbursable neighbourhood help have been eased. 
The person providing neighbourhood support does not require to provide a certificate until 30.9.2020.
Advice for vulnerable-groups: reducing visitors to a minimum. 
Reducing social activities (especially with relatives).
People with care-needs can claim up to €125 per month from their care-insurance to reimburse neighbourhood supporters for their help (shopping, laundry, food delivery, running errands (post, pharmacy). 
Usually neighbourhood supporters need to have recognised skills (participation in course, proof of experience) to be eligible for the scheme.
The requirement to complete a course to be eligible for reimbursement has been lifted until 30-September-2020.
Day and night care-settings had to close. 
They can only provide care for individual persons in emergency situations (18.03.2020-15.06.2020).
Day care settings had to close. 
They can only provide care for individual persons in emergency situations.
This applies in when their unpaid carers work in critical infrastructure, when no alternatives can be arranged or if this loss of care would pose a (health) risk to the cared-for, there is a medical prescription for specific type of care.
They can only provide care for individual persons in emergency situations.
Day care-options are closed.
Services are available for in emergency situations.
This emergency-care must be kept to a minimum. 
It can also be provided to people who only recently developed care-needs.
Day care-continues to be closed, unless for people requiring emergency-care (12-May).
Day care-settings have to close and can only provide emergency care.
Day and night care-centres remain closed until at least 3-May. 
Emergency-care can be provided if necessary. 
This does not apply if the care-recipient develops symptoms, or have had contact with an infected person in the past 14-days.
Day care-services are cancelled. 
Services can only be provided to people in emergency situations.
Day care is open with a reduced offer and under responsibility of the care-provider.
Part-time day or night time services remain closed.
Day care-centres remain closed unless for emergency care.
Day or night care-services are closed, unless people have an emergency need.
Management of the institution decides on case by case basis.
2021-01-13-german-recovery-and-resilience-plan.pdf
The European Union has taken robust action in response to the crisis.
With the recovery instrument Next Generation EU, which amounts to 750 billion, and its largest funding in strument the Recovery and Resilience Facility (RRF), worth billion the foundations have been laid to emerge together from the crisis even stronger than before.
The German government also took swift and decisive action mitigating the economic and social impact of the pandemic and allowing the country to get back on track after the crisis.
In June-2020, a comprehensive economic stimulus package was launched, combining stimulus-measures with important investments in the future.
With the German Recovery and Resilience Plan (GRRP), the federal government contributes to overcoming the Covid-19 crisis and to safeguarding the future of Germany and Europe.
With its country-specific recommendations (CSRs) issued in the context of the European Semester, the EU has given Germany important input for the reforms that need to be made.
The German government is taking these recommendations into account.
It has already implemented multiple reforms on the basis of the CSRs.
The reforms and investments presented within the framework of this plan are fully in line with the CSRs directed at federal government's agenda presented in this recovery plan corresponds to the key objectives of the European recovery plan Next Generation EU and its Recovery and Resilience Facility.
The focus of the GRRP is on tackling the two major challenges of our time, namely climate change and the digital trans formation.
As part of this, the climate-friendly measures cover a broad spectrum, from decarbonisation by means of renewable hydrogen, to climate-friendly mobility, all the way to climate-friendly construction.
The aspiration of digitalisation affects almost all the measures in the recovery plan.
Beyond investment in the rapid digitalisation of infrastructure and the private sector, the focus is also on data as the fundamental raw material for the future.
The plan also includes a national digital education initiative.
Investment in education, innovation and the energy transition will also pay out after the crisis with regard to an economy and society becoming re silient and future-proof.
In this way, the use of the European grants for investment purposes will make an important contribution to our prosperity and to ensuring the long-term sustainability of public finances.
An effective community is the hallmark of a resilient economy and society.
Covid-19 has made crystal clear how important a strong social welfare state is.
The hardest-hit and the most vulnerable-groups need our support.
For this reason, a particular focus is on measures to promote social inclusion and participation in the labour market, which take gender equality into account.
Social resilience also includes strengthening the public health system and fostering a pandemic protection scheme.
Against that background, highly effective social infrastructure elements that protect the health of the population constitute an integral component of the GRRP.
Structural change and a future oriented approach will not be possible without a capable public administration that acts effectively and efficiently, particularly facilitating and pushing forward investment in the future.
The public administration at the level of local authorities, the Länder and the Federation has proved its capability in the Covid-19 crisis.
Germany is continuing to work on accelerating and digitalising processes and reducing existing capacity bottlenecks in order to strengthen public and private investment activity.
The current draft GRRP translates the political priorities into measures that are appropriate for addressing both the key domestic challenges of the future and the priority areas of the European recovery instrument.
In that sense it forms the basis for a consultation with the European Commission, including on still-to-be-defined goals and milestones for the individual measures, with the aim of finalising the GRRP in connection with the National Reform Programme in April-2021, that in view of the final negotiated regulation on the RRF, for submission to the European Commission.
The European Recovery and Resilience Facility (RRF) serves to promote the economic, social and territorial cohesion of the European Union, to strengthen economic and social resilience, to  mitigate the social and economic impact of the crisis, and to support the green and digital transitions.
In order to obtain funds from the RRF, Member States have to submit a national recovery and resilience plan (Articles 14 and 15 of the Proposal for a Regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council establishing a Recovery and Resilience Facility).
The Draft German Recovery and Resilience Plan (GRRP) contains proposals from the federal government for measures that serve to achieve the objectives is facing major challenges in the area of climate protection.
Large-scale global decarbonisation is essential in order to halt human-made climate change.
Achieving decarbonisation without a decline in quality of life, and linking decarbonisation to a new impetus for value creation and employment on the road to the post-fossil age, are some of the most important tasks of economic policy.
Promotion of climate-friendly action is therefore a key pillar of the GRRP.
These programme elements thus also address three key European flagship initiatives1 (see info box): Power up, Renovate and Recharge and refuel.
In total, about 40% of the expenditure in this draft plan contributes to climate action, thereby fulfilling a key objective for the national recovery plans.
The successful digitalisation of the economy and infrastructure is of crucial importance to ensure that Germany and Europe are ready for the future.
For this reason, the second focal point of the GRRP is the digital transformation.
The two components that are in quantitative terms most important are data as the raw material of the future and the promotion of the digital transition of the economy.
The German plan in that sense makes an important contribution to the European flagship goals of Connect, Modernise and Scale-up.
In total, over 40% of expenditure contributes to the digital transition.
Hence, the requested European target of 20% for digital will be exceeded by a large margin in the current plan.
Clean, future-proof technologies will be introduced at an early stage and the use of renewable energies will be accelerated through network integration and interconnectivity.
The foundation for hydrogen lead markets and infrastructure will be laid by means of the build-up and sector integration of almost 40% of the 500 GW of electricity that will need to be generated from renewable energy sources by 2030, the creation of 6 GW of electrolysis capacity and the generation and transportation of one million tonnes of renewable hydrogen by 2025.
Improving energy and resource efciency in public and private buildings will help to achieve the EU's climate targets, create jobs and promote digital development.
The aim is to double the renovation rate by 2025.
Support for clean technologies for the use of sustainable, smart means of transport, support for charging stations and lling stations, and for the expansion of public transport networks.
By 2025, one million of the three million charging stations needed by 2030 and 50% of the 1,000 hydrogen stations needed, shall be provided.
Only 44% of households currently have access to networks with very high capacity, while network coverage in rural areas is considerably lower.
The rapid expansion of fast broadband services for the benet of all regions and households, including fibre-optic and 5G networks, and the development of quantum encrypted communications are of crucial importance in order to ensure the highest possible territorial coverage and to ensure the strategic autonomy of the EU.
The measures provided for in the Recovery and Resilience Facility should ensure the maximum possible 5G coverage in all areas by 2025.
EU identication services and digital public services should be modernised and accessible to everyone.
With secure, EU-wide electronic identication and authentication with respectto government agencies and private operators, citizens will gain control over their online identity and their data, and access to digital online services will be made easier.
The public administration and public services (including the judicial and healthcare systems) will become more efficient.
By 2025, a European digital identity (eID) will be introduced, and interoperable, personalised and user-friendly digital public services will be provided.
The cloud capacity of European industry must be increased, and powerful, sustainable processors must be developed.
By 2025, the production of semiconductors in Europe will be doubled, and processors that are ten times more energy-efficient will be produced.
This will rapidly advance the use of connected vehicles, and the use of advanced cloud services and big data will be doubled (from the current level of 16%).
Investment in retraining and further training-measures and reforms should be targeted towards digital skills and general and vocational training in all age-groups.
In 2019, 42% of Europeans lacked basic digital skills.
By 2025, the proportion of those aged between 16 and 74-years with digital skills should increase to 70%.
Education systems need to be adapted to the challenges of the 21st century by means of a signicant improvement in pupils' digital skills.
The proportion of 13-and 14-year-old pupils whose performance in the area of computer and IT skills is below average will fall to under 15%, and priority will be given to disadvantaged-groups, women and in particular young-people by means of high-quality employment opportunities and vocational education and training.
By 2025, four out of five people who have completed vocational training should be in employment, and three out of five people should be completing further training-measures while in work.
Education (including basic and further education, training and requalification) is of high importance for long-term potential growth and wealth creation.
The Covid-19 crisis has revealed, not for the first time, that Germany is facing considerable challenges in the field of digital literacy in particular.
This concerns both device infrastructure as well as the associated platforms and competences.
A digital education initiative will exploit the opportunities and potential that digitalisation is able to offer to individuals and society, by opening up equal educational opportunities irrespective of family background or ethnic origin.
In addition, the promotion of the future labour market opportunities ensure success possibilities for all young-people.
The GRRP is thus making an important contribution to the EU flagship Reskill and  Covid-19 crisis has highlighted the importance of social cohesion in overcoming serious crises.
Although Germany has a strong sense of community and comparatively high levels of social protection, the Covid-19 pandemic has made it apparent that the hardest-hit and most vulnerable-groups require targeted support.
Therefore, an important goal of the recovery plan is to strengthen social inclusion, in particular by improving conditions for participation in the labour market and hence for appropriate wage growth, and by ensuring that the pension system is sustainable while simultaneously securing adequate pensions.
enhances social inclusion and contributes to three EU flagship initiatives: Renovate, Modernise and Reskill and upskill.
By funding the accelerated research and development of urgently needed vaccines against Covid-19, the GRRP contributes to urgent efforts to fight the pandemic.
Although Germany has so far proved better than average at cushioning the effects of the pandemic on the healthcare sector, the crisis has, however, also revealed structural challenges for the German healthcare system.
To ensure that it is equipped for the future, significant action is required in areas of the public health service that are relevant to the pandemic, but also with regard to the further development of the hospital sector.
The public health service will be strengthened in digital and technical terms, to ensure a long-term improvement in its resilience as an important pillar of the public healthcare system in Germany.
Hospitals can take advantage of a targeted support programme to make themselves more future-ready, again with a focus on Germany, the state has proved to be effective and capable of taking action during the crisis.
However, experience has also shown that transformation and a forward-looking approach cannot succeed without a public administration that keeps pace with new developments and which in some cases can even provide the impetus for change.
The first component of the measures therefore focuses on increasing digitalisation in the public administration, but also on building up infrastructure that will enable identities to be established on the Web without assistance from the major platforms.
This component takes into account the EU flagship Modernise.
Reducing barriers to investment is also key to modernising the country.
This component focuses on effective regulation that encourages innovation and on a service-oriented public administration.
It therefore implements a major country-specific recommendation aimed at Germany.
When drawing up the GRRP, the federal government is in a close policy dialogue with the European Commission with the aim of identifying projects and reform measures that have a good chance of being implemented effectively and that support the objectives of the RRF.
The volume of the measures included in this draft plan exceeds the fiscal envelope that is currently projected, in the clear knowledge that adjustments will have to be made in the course of drawing up the final Recovery and Resilience Plan, taking into account the provisions of the final regulation and the increasing specificity of many measures.
It must also be borne in mind that there may be shifts in emphasis in subsequent years with regard to reforms and long-term investments, which may require amendments to the plan within the framework of Article 18 of the Proposal for Recovery and Resilience Facility.
In accordance with the conclusions of the European Council of July-2020, funds from the RRF can be committed in the years from 2021 to 2023 and spent up to 2026.
According to current estimates based on the European Commission's autumn forecast, Germany is entitled to subsidies of around €23.641 billion from the RRF, of which €15.201 billion (70%) is committed for the years 2021/22 and €8.444 billion (30%) is committed for 2023 (in 2018 prices) (Article 11 of the Proposal for a Regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council establishing a Re covery and Resilience Facility).
Calculated at current prices, the RRF funds come to approximately €25 billion, including around €16.3 billion in 2021/22 and about €9.3 billion from 2023 onwards.
It must be borne in mind that the 30% tranche for the years from 2023 onwards could change significantly if the key macro-economic data in the EU Member States are revised.
Unless stated otherwise, all information hereinafter is given in current prices.
In order for funds to be drawn on, predefined milestones and targets need to be met; these need to be implemented by July 2026 at the latest. 
Allocations from other NGEU funds, such as from the Just Transition Fund, are not included in the framework of this recovery plan.
These funds also contribute to the financing of important transformative tasks, particularly in the area of structural adjustments, and should therefore be taken into account in an overall evaluation of German policies in this area.
Nevertheless, a co-financing via other EU funds for planned measures is addition-ally possible, provided that they comply with the guidelines for the relevant European funds, and in this respect is also reported accordingly.
Furthermore, a quite substantial co-financing is provided in individual cases by the German Länder and the local authorities for certain measures at the federal level financed by the RRF.
The federal government measures requested here thus create clear positive incentives for the Länder and the municipalities, as well as for the private sector, therefore leveraging the effectiveness of the measures of this plan.
The GRRP-measures are already included in the 2021 federal budget (adopted by the German Bundestag on 11-December-2020) and in the medium-term financial plan for the period up to 2024, which is to be updated in early 2021 as part of the budgetary benchmark decisions for the next financial plan.
The provisions in the financial plan for the implementation of the economic stimulus package are to be used primarily for the GRRP-measures.
With a view to the fiscal framework created by the federal budget and the financial plan, the measures announced here must be classified as provisional from a fiscal viewpoint.
A definitive review of the budgetary specifications will be carried out before the final recovery plan is produced.
The measures in the Recovery and Resilience Plan take into account all the relevant country-specific recommendations from the European Semester process for the years 2019 and 2020 (see info boxes).
The plan thus supplements the comprehensive information system of the National Reform Programme (in the context of the Macroeconomic Imbalance Procedure, for example, but also with regard to the Sustainable Development Goals), as well as reporting within the scope of the Draft Budgetary Plan and the Stability Programme (with respect to fiscal policy recommendations).
The country-specific recommendations for both 2019 and 2020 call on Germany to increase its investment activity.
The measures included in the GRRP from the federal government's economic stimulus and future development package raise investment spending to a historic level.
There will be a focus on investments in digitalisation and in emissions-free energy and mobility.
As well as investment in technologies and innovations and fundamental reforms in the area of data infrastructure, the funding priority of digitalisation covers the areas of education, the economy, public administration and the healthcare system.
In addition, climate action is a major focus of the investments contained in the GRRP, including green hydrogen as a drive technology, electric mobility and energy-efficient building renovation.
The measures presented in the recovery plan are thus embedded in a forward-looking national investment strategy that systematically implements the recommendations aimed at Germany.
Investment spending is being significantly increased (see figure 1) with a ten-year investment programme, while the EU funds available through the RRF will simultaneously help to provide lasting fiscal support for this investment strategy and allow for a frontloading of investment-measures.
This will help to modernise infrastructure, increase productivity and improve overall economic growth potential.
The comprehensive investment-measures are supplemented and made more effective by far-reaching reforms, particularly in the context of the public administration.
For example, the possibility of a joint initiative with Partnerschaft Deutschland is being pursued.
The aim is to systematically identify barriers to the outflow of funds at the various levels of the public administration and to develop concrete proposals for solutions on this basis.
On 2 December 2020, the federal government and the Länder agreed for the first time on a detailed work programme for a public administration that is efficient, citizen-friendly and business-friendly; the programme will develop measures to simplify legal matters and speed up planning and infrastructure projects.
The Investment Acceleration Act (Investitionsbeschleunigungsgesetz) recently passed by the Bundestag aims in particular to avoid duplicate reviews of major investment projects.
These reforms address the key country-specific recommendation that barriers in the area of public and private investment activity should be reduced.
Significant measures of the GRRP will comprehensively strengthen the effectiveness and digitalisation of the public administration.
A specific component is dedicated to this issue, which includes important reforms relating to public administrative services in the form of the European identity ecosystem, the implementation of the Online Access Act and the modernisation of registers.
Further groundbreaking reforms are planned in this area with the digital pensions overview and the digitalisation of the public health service.
In addition, the 2019 country-specific recommendations require Germany to a) reduce disincentives to work more hours (particularly for low-wage and second earners), strengthen the conditions that support higher wage growth while respecting the role of the social partners, and c) take measures to safeguard the long-term sustainability of the pension system while simultaneously keeping pensions at an adequate level.
This is where component 4.1 comes in, with measures at different stages in the life cycle (investment in childcare facilities, trainee support, Social Guarantee 2021, digital pensions overview).
Furthermore, the comprehensive investments and reforms in the areas of digital education and further training in particular (skills alliances in component 2.2) create the conditions for participation in the labour market and long-term safeguarding of employability, and strengthen the educational outcomes and skill levels of disadvantaged-groups.
Funding for a special programme to accelerate the research and development of urgently needed vaccines against Covid-19 serve specifically to combat the pandemic.
The long-term resilience of the healthcare system will be supported by strength-ening the digital and technical resources of the public health service and through the programme to future-proof hospitals (Zukunftsprogramm-Krankenhäuser)
When calculating budget balances as part of European budgetary surveillance, subsidies from the RRF and the corresponding expenditure are entered in such a way that they have a neutral impact on balances, as defined in the national accounts.
Funds from the RRF are thus recorded for statistical purposes in the same way as regular EU subsidies to Member States.
At the time the measure is recorded on the expenses side, a corresponding transaction is entered on the revenue side, which ensures that, irrespective of the actual time that the EU subsidy is disbursed, RRF-measures are recorded in a way 
Finally, the 2020/21 country-specific recommendations call on Germany to combat the economic consequences of the pandemic effectively and to support the economy and promote its recovery, while also ensuring that debt remains manageable in the medium term.
German fiscal policy is strongly expansionary at the current time and therefore follows this recommendation.
The federal government's economic stimulus programme thus also provides a significant expansionary fiscal stimulus for the Eurozone.
At the same time, the relevant requirement in the German debt brake rule ensures that any additional debt taken on in an emergency which has a structural impact and which exceeds the upper limit for new borrowing must be reduced in the medium term.
From 2022 onwards, the deficit is expected to fall below the limit of 3% of GDP once again and the deficit will be further reduced, with the aim of ensuring that debt remains sustainable.
The medium-term budgetary objective (MTO) not exceeding  0.5% of GDP will be achieved again in 2024, according to projections and the financial plan.
Ongoing low interest rates, recovering economic growth and lower levels of new borrowing will help to reduce the debt ratio in the medium term to 68% of GDP by 2024 (see table 1 and figure 2).
A comprehensive overview of the focus of Germany's fiscal policy is provided in the reporting on the Stability Programme and in the Draft Budgetary Plan.
In line with the general escape clause, take all necessary measures to effectively address the pandemic, sustain the economy and support the ensuing recovery.
When economic conditions allow, pursue fiscal policies aimed at achieving prudent medium-term fiscal positions and ensuring debt sustainability, while enhancing investment.
Mobilise adequate resources and strengthen the resilience of the health system, including by deploying ehealth services.
Front-load mature public investment projects and promote private investment to foster the economic recovery.
Focus investment on the green and digital transition, in particular on sustainable transport, clean, efficient and integrated energy systems, digital infrastructure and skills, housing, education and research, and innovation.
Improve digital public services across all levels and foster the digitalisation in small and medium-sized enterprises.
Reduce the regulatory and administrative burden for businesses.
While respecting the medium-term budgetary objective, use fiscal and structural policies to achieve a sustained upward trend in private and public investment, notably at regional and municipal level.
Focus investment-related economic policy on education; research and innovation; digitalisation and very-high-capacity broad band; sustainable transport as well as energy net works and affordable housing, taking into account regional disparities.
Shift taxes away from labour to sources  more supportive for inclusive and sustainable growth.
Strengthen competition in business services and regulated professions.
Reduce disincentives to work more hours, including the high tax wedge, in particular for low-wage and second earners.
Take measures to safeguard the long-term sustainability of the pension system, while preserving adequacy.
Strengthen the conditions that support higher wage growth, while respecting the role of the social partners.
Improve educational outcomes and skills levels of disadvantaged-groups.
In June-2020, the German government adopted an economic stimulus and future-oriented package with an unprecedented total volume of over €180 billion in the 2020 and 2021 budgets alone.
This is the centrepiece of the federal government's fiscal response to the Covid-19 crisis and is supplemented by measures adopted before and afterwards to deal with the pandemic's impact on health, society and the economy.
Along with the traditional "three Ts" of economic policy ("timely", "temporary", "targeted"), the guiding principle was also to take measures to strengthen potential growth in the long term and to facilitate the transition to a climate-neutral and digital future ("transformative").
The measures enshrined in the GRRP systematically reflect the domestic efforts of the economic stimulus package, the timing and scale of which make Germany a pioneer in Europe
The economic stimulus programme consists of three pillars: 
The first pillar, the economic stimulus and crisis management package - boosts overall economic demand and makes additional liquidity available to companies.
The federal government is also offering businesses tax incentives in order to maintain investment activity, relieving the pressure on local authorities as a key player in public investment activity, and is bringing forward its own investments.
The second pillar in the programme is the future development package.
With this, the federal government is strengthening private and public investment at all levels in order to drive forward the modernisation of the German economy.
These additional investment-measures, which are also related to efforts to tackle the effects of the pandemic, but which have a longer time horizon, total around €50 billion overall.
This spending will modernise infrastructure and make it more efficient, thereby increasing productivity.
Investment in (potentially disruptive) technologies of the future is associated with a longer-term planning and implementation perspective and will increase the potential level of economic development in the long run.
The third pillar underlines Germany's responsibilities at European and international level as the largest economy in the EU.
It includes, for example, a Franco-German initiative that contributed to the realisation of Next Generation EU and will be reflected in joint future projects.
Germany is also making funds available at international level in order to step up international cooperation in combating the Covid-19 crisis.
In view of the significant overlap between the goals of the economic stimulus programme and those of the European Recovery and Resilience Facility, the specific measures of the GRRP will concentrate on the following six focus areas:
In addition to the measures in the economic stimulus package, the federal government is underlining the focus areas of climate action and digitalisation through further measures in the GRRP.
Three "Important Projects of Common European Interest" (IPCEIs) in the areas of hydrogen, microelectronics/communication technologies and cloud/data processing are particularly worth mentioning.
These projects can be traced back to the Franco-German technology dialogue and send a strong message about Franco-German cooperation as measures that are simultaneously part of the German and the French recovery and resilience plans (see info box).
They build on projects such as the creation of a Franco-German research and innovation network ("virtual centre") for artificial intelligence and a Franco-German business and innovation park in the context of the future process Fessenheim, which were already agreed in the "Franco-German Agenda" as specific priority projects implementing the Treaty of Aachen.
The IPCEIs are open to the participation of other EU Member States.
Just as with the initiative by Germany and France for the recovery instrument in May-2020, we also want to send out a signal about European cooperation when it comes to the use of funds from the Recovery and Resilience Facility.
This will take place in key areas of the digital and green trans formation: hydrogen, cloud computing and microelectronics/communication technologies.
Three key projects have been developed in these areas in technology dialogues with representatives from business and the European Commission.
The specic aim of these projects is to become a nexus for transformations and market adjustments that will lead to structural reforms and will have an EU-wide impact.
We want our projects to create an integrated EU-wide market for hydrogen production, including cross-border transport infrastructure, lay the foundations for a European edge cloud infrastructure, and free the EU from dependence on external providers for selected microelectronic communication technologies.
We will make use of the instrument of the IPCEI to implement these projects.
The projects are being initiated and  promoted by Germany and France; at the same time, as IPCEIs they are projects that have originated in Europe and by denition are thus open to stakeholders from all EU Member States.
IPCEIs are also a tried-and-tested instrument of cooperation with the European Commission, particularly with regard to EU state aid control.
Industrialisation has brought major gains in prosperity for Germany and many parts of the world.
However, the past two centuries of industrialisation were based on the use of fossil energy sources.
The impact on the climate has become a serious threat to our environment and natural resources.
We need to stop anthropogenic climate change.
The latest UN report shows that there is still a long way to go until the United Nations' Sustainable Development Goals for 2030 are achieved.
In order to achieve the Sustainable Development Goals and the Paris Agreement's targets, the German government and the European Union are working towards achieving net-zero greenhouse gas emissions by 2050.
This will require major efforts, but also offers huge opportunities.
With regard to our energy supply in particular, complete decarbonisation is required even before 2050.
Germany had already initiated an energy transition at an early stage, with extensive-measures that cannot be presented here in detail (e.g. 2010 Energy Strategy, Climate Action Plan 2050, Climate Action Programme 2030, Renewable Energy Sources Act (Erneuer-bare-Energien-Gesetz) and the Coal Phase-Out Act (Kohleausstiegsgesetz)).
The projects in the Recovery and Resilience Plan support this strategic objective and can be broken down into the following components: decarbonisation using renewable hydrogen in particular, climate-friendly mobility and climate-friendly renovation and construction.
Decarbonisation using renewable hydrogen in particular.
The National Hydrogen Strategy describes an important addition to the future energy supply in Germany.
It will make a contribution to the decarbonisation of the economy and society.
Sustainable CO2-free hydrogen that is produced using renewable energy will play an important part in achieving energy and climate targets and in the decarbonisation of the economy and parts of the transport sector.
It also offers significant opportunities in terms of industrial, innovation and employment policy, including with regard to the export of technology.
At the current time, however, a market for green hydrogen does not exist either at the national or the European level, as the use of green hydrogen technologies is currently even more expensive than using fossil hydrogen.
On top of this, green electricity from renewable sources is not yet available in sufficient quantities.
In addition, there is currently a lack of proven solutions for the large-scale industrial implementation of a green hydrogen economy, meaning that there is a significant need for further research and innovation.
The National Hydrogen Strategy lays the foundations for making Germany an international lead marketand leading provider for the development, manufacture and use of green hydrogen technologies.
To do this,  Germany must lead the way in manufacturing, infrastructure, research and development and technological development, as well as with regard to therapid expansion of renewable energy sources that is necessary for the production of green hydrogen.
It is clear that the development and use of green hydrogen  technologies will require high investments in the beginning, which the state must support with government funding for investments and operating costs.
The catalogue of measures in the National Hydrogen Strategy combines investment in the development of a hydrogen economy with corresponding initiatives relating to the revision of regulatory law, particularly in the area of price regulation, and thus includes both investments and a significant reform approach.
Based on our experiences with the first projects, particularly cross-border infrastructure projects within the scope of the IPCEI, we want to draw up recommendations for adjustments to the regulatory framework at a national level and for structures for the regulatory framework that is needed at EU level.
The GRRP will implement important components of the National Hydrogen Strategy.
Specific integrated projects along the entire value-added chain will be promoted within the scope of an IPCEI for hydrogen with the aim of accelerating the necessary market ramp-up.
There will be a particular emphasis on a) building up large-scale electrolysis capacity for producing green hydrogen at locations where sufficient electricity from renewables is available, a) the industrial use of green hydrogen as a decarbonisation option for large industrial facilities, c) the development of a European value-added chain for fuel cell systems for vehicle drive systems, d) the development and production of light and heavy lorries/commercial vehicles, buses, freight and passenger trains, cars for use in vehicle fleets, air transport and ship transport with hydrogen-based drives, e) the creation of refuelling infrastructure, including for heavy goods transport, and f) the development of various cross-border flagship projects that will form the core of a European hydrogen network.
In addition, it will be essential to create infrastructure to transport hydrogen.
It needs to be examined to what extent the existing gas network infrastructure can be used to transport hydrogen.
The addition of hydrogen to existing natural gas networks currently in use is not viable for reasons of energy efficient
As a Franco-German project, the project contributes to the sovereignty approach to the development of a European value-added chain for key technologies and of infrastructure, with the aim of establishing a European market for green hydrogen.
A launch event in conjunction with other Member States is planned for December-2020, and the beginning of the German expression-of-interest procedure for the IPCEI for hydrogen is scheduled for December-2020/January-2021 
The project is linked to the country-specific recom-mendations in that it contributes to investments in the ecological transition, research and innovation, the decarbonisation of industry and transport, and clean, efficient and integrated energy systems.
It also helps to strengthen the competitiveness of the European economy and to preserve its technological leadership and security of of supply.
The funding programme "decarbonisation in industry" plans, with regard to energy-intensive industries with process-related emissions, to support a) research and development, b) testing in test and pilot facilities, and c) investments in facilities for the industrial-scale application and implementation of measures, provided that they are suitable for bringing about the most substantial and lasting reduction possible in greenhouse gas emissions.
In this way, industry can help to achieve net-zero greenhouse gas emissions by 2050.
As an expensive and scarce commodity, green hydrogen will be used where it will have the biggest long-term impact in terms of climate action and where there are no more efficient technical options for decarbonisation.
The focus will be on the use of green hydrogen in industry.
As well as investment costs, the higher operating costs required for innovative climate action technologies constitute a challenge.
The German government will therefore launch a pilot scheme for climate action contracts based on the approach of Carbon Contracts for Differences (CCfDs).
This pilot scheme will be geared towards funding for additional operating costs (OPEX) due to climate and environmental action and will thus be a useful supplement to the programmes for funding investment cost.
In addition, further efforts are required in the area of research and development, in order to make available the technologies and the associated system knowledge that are necessary to implement the goals of the National Hydrogen Strategy.
Corresponding flagship projects for research and innovation will be launched to this end.
The funds that are used specifically for project-related research will support the development of climate-friendly production processes and combinations of processes in basic industries, contributing directly to the avoidance of greenhouse gases.
The emphasis is on the direct avoidance of process-related CO2 emissions by developing new production processes, particularly in the context of an initially low level of technological maturity.
The support-measure is designed to be cross-sectoral and is targeted primarily at companies in the areas of iron/steel/non-ferrous metals, chemicals and minerals (e.g. glass, ceramics, cement).
The research approaches consist of, for example, using hydrogen in energy-intensive processes (metal production, glass production) or in the partial substitution of cement in the production of concrete by developing new input materials, which would allow process-related CO2 emissions in the production of cement to be at least partially avoided.
A specific approach plans to transform the production of soda, a mass-produced product, from a source of CO2 into a carbon sink by means of a new production process.
The need for reforms described above applies not only to basic industries, but also to small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) that generate a large proportion of Germany's economic output.
On the one hand, they must find innovative solutions to ensure that their own production processes are climate-efficient and conserve resources.
On the other, they are often the drivers of innovation in their sectors as suppliers or service providers.
The funds used will enable SMEs to establish themselves with sustainable solutions or to secure and expand their position and competitiveness on global markets.
The implementation of these objectives will be supported by a support-measure that takes into account SMEs' concerns and needs in the area of resource efficiency and climate action.
This measure is designed to be cross-sectoral and is not restricted to any particular aspect.
Hence it is available to both the manufacturing and the service sectors.
Accordingly, the development of new environ mentally friendly products and processes will be supported, as will innovations in the areas of soft-ware and services.
Other partners in the transformation of the energy system include local authorities and urban regions.
Many metropolitan areas are therefore looking for solutions for a sustainable future in the context of adapting to climate change.
The deployed funds will enable cities to promote knowledge creation in relation to concrete options for action and processes, as well as to increase the effectiveness of measures to adapt to climate change.
The second component in the area of climate action relates to the transition to climate-friendly mobility.
It takes into account the country-specific recommendations on investments in the ecological transition, particularly sustainable transport, and helps implement the EU flagship initiative Recharge and refuel.
Subsidies for the construction of filling and charging infrastructure are intended to support the market ramp-up of battery- and hydrogen-based electric vehicles.
This requires a comprehensive network of charging infrastructure in line with demand.
While the available charging infrastructure is a key factor in the acceptance of emissions-free vehicles, the development of electric mobility and innovation premium programmes directly boost demand for these types of passenger cars and close existing gaps in the area of research and development by means of targeted support.
This will be complemented by a reform of vehicle tax in which a tax exemption for purely electric vehicles and a tax reduction for low-emissions passenger cars will be introduced.
Other measures within this component aim to promote purchases of buses with alternative drives and to promote alternative drives in rail transport, and also relate to the replacement of the heavy commercial vehicle fleet.
In addition to charging infrastructure and as well as boosting demand for vehicles with alternative drives, the production side will also be strengthened.
As part of the National Hydrogen Strategy, support will be provided, within a new holistic approach, for a competitive supply industry for hydrogen and fuel cell technology for heavy goods vehicles.
In particular, the aim is to enable production of fuel cell stacks and nearseries component and vehicle testing in Germany.
The new Hydrogen Technology and Innovation Centre (Technologie-und Innovationszentrum Wasserstofftechnologie) that is to be established will focus on the value-added chain of hydrogen and fuel cell technologies for mobility applications, with the aim of ensuring the future viability of the German/European industry.
The technical focus of the centre will be on fuel cell systems.
In addition, the infra-structural integration with filling station technology and the corresponding interfaces with vehicles and filling systems will also be addressed.
The main motivation for establishing a Hydrogen Technology and Innovation Centre is the need for a development, certification and standardisation facility, which, due to the early market phase and the high costs involved, cannot be realised without support from the public sector.
The centre will provide in particular small and medium-sized enterprises and start-ups with a development environment, enabling them to position themselves to compete internationally.
The Hydrogen Technology and Innovation Centre should also provide further added value in terms of international cooperation for setting standards and corresponding certification processes through prenormative work.
The German government has not previously pursued a comparable approach to supporting companies in the field of hydrogen fuel cell systems.
Climate-friendly renovation and construction, This component is targeted at the climate objective with a focus on the EU flagship Renovate.
Within the scope of the local authority living labs for the energy transition, local authorities will use ambitious, energy-optimised construction projects as blueprints for a broad building typology.
Innovative construction projects will aim to strengthen the part played by local authorities as a role model in climate action and the energy transition, accelerate the rapid transfer of innovations to society and promote broad acceptance.
The research and demonstration projects aim to achieve a measurable reduction in the environmental impact and will be used in the testing and dissemination of scientific technological approaches in order to test and demonstrate their practicability.
The main target groups are large-scale implementation projects, whereby the involvement of SMEs in particular will be promoted.
These reforms are a key element of the EU flagship Renovate.
With the Federal Funding for Energy-Efficient Buildings, the federal government is reorganising its funding for energy efficiency in buildings in connection with the implementation of the Climate Action Programme 2030 and the funding strategy "Energy Efficiency and Heat from Renewable Energies" ("Ener-gieeffizienz-und-Wärme-aus-Erneuerbaren-Energien").
The aim is to encourage investments that will improve energy efficiency and increase the share of renewable energies in the end energy consumption of buildings.
Funding will be provided for the construction and renovation of residential buildings at "efficiency house" level, whose energy needs and CO2 emissions will be well below the legal requirements.
In particular, funding will be provided for innovative energy-related renovations or new buildings belonging to public companies.
Each type of funding will be available in the form of both subsidies and loans.
Key elements include: the introduction of "EE" classes (e.g."efficiency house 55EE") for the use of renewable energies; higher rates of funding for efficiency house level EH 40 as a particularly ambitious project; promotion of digitalisation-measures to optimise consumption (e.g. Efficiency Smart Home) with a technology-neutral approach.
The support schemes for the newly introduced sustainability classes ("NH" classes) will be based on demonstrating certification in the form of the Federal Ministry of the Interior's "Sustainable Building" certification mark, which is currently being developed.
New buildings with the "Sustainable Building" certification mark will receive increased funding as "NH" classes (e.g. The NH classes do not only take into account the operational phase of buildings; instead, applying the life cycle approach to sustainable building, the focus is also on what are known as "grey" emissions, i.e. greenhouse gas emissions from the production phase including upstream supply chains.
The funding guideline will play a key part in reducing greenhouse gas emissions from buildings to 70 million tonnes of CO2 equivalents by 2030 and thus in achieving both national and European energy and climate targets by 2030.
The forestry and timber industries are facing major structural challenges.
Storms and droughts that have been intensified by climate change and associated bark beetle infestations have caused massive damage to forests across Germany.
The future viability of the forestry and timber sector is heavily dependent on the development of domestic sales markets for timber.
Climate-friendly timber construction plays a key role here.
The timber construction industry is mainly structured around small and medium-sized enterprises.
Given the rapid technological changes taking place, leading to applications in the areas of digitalisation, robotics and artificial intelligence, the accelerated introduction and dissemination of modern technologies is necessary in order to keep companies competitive and ensure adequate economic growth and high levels of employment.
Factors such as material and energy efficiency and the integration of environmental and life cycle assessment data into business processes are becoming increasingly relevant.
At the same time, rising demand and the need for complex construction projects present new challenges for companies: as well as technological changes, they require an adjustment of structures and capacities in the traditional timber construction sector.
These necessary adjustment processes can be supported by promoting advisory services with the aim of increasing the use of timber as a building material and by establishing and expanding innovation clusters in the timber construction sector.
They can also be expected to have positive steering effects with regard to the future challenges of digitalisation, resource efficiency and climate action.
Technological change is advancing relentlessly.
In particular, the digitalisation of everyday life and the economy is changing our society and economy at a rapid pace and not just in terms of communications.
The focus is on technological transformation through digitalisation and the associated development of efficient infrastructure.
The necessary structural transformation will involve profound changes.
The first component in this focus area is dedicated to the issue of data as the raw material of the future.
It addresses the European flagship goals Connect, Modernise and Scale-up "Innavation data policy for Germany" reform package. 
If nothing else, the pandemic has highlighted the importance of the availability and use of relevant, up-to-date data in order to make decisions quickly on the basis of facts.
The federal government wants to redefine Germany's data policy with an ambitious data strategy that spans different policy areas.
The strategy aims to promote data-driven innovations and increase the provision and responsible use of data.
The federal government's initiative is also an integrative component of a European vision for the data age.
The measures/packages of measures listed below will be implemented as of 2021.
Data infrastructure for high-performance com-puting (HPC): To create efficient HPC infrastructure in Europe, the existing infrastructure needs to be better connected and expanded.
The federal government is developing an "Overall strategy on computing infrastructure" to this end and is supporting in this way European HPC initiatives and development projects.
Expansion activities at the various levels will be interlinked and will be supported by research into the development of hardware and software for future computer systems and applications.
Along with the expansion of infrastructure, the strategy aims to develop specific industrial use cases in cooperation with businesses, and to promote the necessary skills in companies.
Data custodians: For the pooling and joint use of specific data, it may be useful to have these services provided by a "data custodian", which will ensure that the data contributed by various institutions (e.g. companies) are shared securely and fairly.
To promote a variety of data custodian models, the federal government has launched an ideas contest and is setting up a funding programme for the development and testing of innovative data custodians.
Support will be provided for practical projects, which may be inter-disciplinary, that contribute to the concrete design of data custodian models and thereby address the broadest possible range of issues.
Anonymisation and depersonalisation of data: To promote technical data protection, the federal government will set up a research network for anonymisation.
As well as conducting research, this network will boost the transfer of research by supporting the public administration and business with issues relating to the anonymisation/depersonalisation of data, thus creating incentives to share data.
By pooling skills in a network and establishing a specific research profile, the federal government will strengthen research in this area on a lasting basis and will seek to achieve a prominent international position.
Data skills in science: The federal government will enhance scientists' skills in the handling of data.
As part of this, it is setting up a National Research Data Infrastructure (NFDI).
Institutions involved in the NFDI will receive support with the development of elearning modules that can be used in the training of specialist scientists.
After that, model data science laboratories will be set up at sites belonging to NFDI and will act as centres of excellence for data sciences.
In addition, the federal government will launch a doctoral programme to develop skills in the field of data sciences and a service that will enable funding to be provided for research projects based on the use of existing research data sets.
Data skills in society: The federal government will provide funding for the creation of a "toolbox" to in crease data skills in various areas of application.
for companies and civil society organisations.
This toolbox will be developed centrally and then made freely available.
This service will be of particular interest to small and medium-sized enterprises, as - unlike large companies - they do not have enough resources of their own to invest in the development of their own data skills.
The federal government is also developing specific services for students (data literacy courses) and is pushing for the responsible use and provision of data, and for a shift to a strong open data culture.
Intensification of the sharing of data will be accompanied by more efficient control of data protection and cybersecurity.
IPCEI microelectronics and communication technologies
Networks and communications (5G, 6G, OpenRAN) will in future be dominated even more strongly than today by microelectronic components.
This includes components such as processors and microchips as well as components for control and data processing, sending and receiving components for fixed data transmission (expansion of fibre-optic broadband) or wireless data transmission (mobile phone reception), and components for self-diagnosis, defence against attacks or artificial intelligence (AI) and HPC hardware.
The German and European economies therefore need an efficient and broad-based microelectronics sector with local patents, development and production.
During the Franco-German technology dialogue with the European Commission, the political will to realise an IPCEI for microelectronics and communication technologies became clear.
As well as strengthening those areas of microelectronics in which Europe is in a good position (e.g. power electronics, sensors), the IPCEI will above all aim to catch up in those fields where Europe has so far been dependent on imports from other countries.
The intention is to support the development of future innovative network/micro-electronic technologies, based on smaller structures and a combination of functionalities and materials, in Europe up to market maturity, in order to put Europe in a better position in future with respect to the consequences of dependence on global supply chains in the area of communications.
IPCEI cloud and data processingThe IPCEI was looked into during the Franco-German technology dialogue on 13-October-2020 as a measure to increase Europe's digital sovereignty.
The aim is to create the basis for a sovereign, highly scalable edge cloud infrastructure in Europe.
The infrastructure will build on highly innovative, real-time-capable structures distributed across Europe and will be operated in a way that is highly efficient and will save energy.
This will require extensive R&D activities, including the development and definition of open source technologies.
The programme also encompasses investments in a first industrial application.
The infrastructure builds on the rules and standards compiled by GAIA-X.
Its capability will be demonstrated with the implementation of one or more highly complex use cases.
Spain and Italy have already agreed to participate in this IPCEI 
This component is dedicated to the digitalisation of individual economic sectors.
It contributes to the EU flagships Scale-up and Reskill and upskill
The vehicle industry must deal with two major challenges simultaneously.
On the one hand, it must play a significant part in achieving climate targets.
This will require a fundamental shift to alternative drive systems, while the use of traditional combustion engines will decline.
On the other hand, the industry is being affected by digitalisation on two levels.
Vehicles themselves are becoming increasingly digital, from entertainment systems to automated driving on roads and rail.
However, production must also become increasingly digital, driven by rising demand for flexibilisation and international cost pressure.
Only the widespread introduction of Industry 4.0 will make the sector truly future-proof.
The qualification and further training of existing employees will also be of crucial importance for the success of the transformation.
The programme for vehicle manufacturers/the supplier industry therefore aims to strengthen and above all to modernise vehicle manufacturers (including the rail industry) and the supplier industry in three areas.
In module (a), investments in new technologies, processes and facilities will be promoted.
The focus will be on environmental investments to ensure that production facilities are material-and-energy-efficient and on digitalisation/introduction of Industry 4.0 across the board.
Module (b) supports research and development for innovations that are relevant to the transformation.
Issues covered include automated and connected driving, alternative drive technologies, lightweight energy-optimised design and new materials, new business models and digitalecosystems throughout the entire supply chain.
Module (c) promotes new regional innovation clusters, particularly in the supplier industry, which will also supplement the training initiative.
The digitalisation and networking in innovation clusters will not only give rise to new business models, but also new forms of cooperation, particularly in connection with more flexible production facilities.
As a reform, the federal programme "Development of skills alliances" aims to increase the participation of SMEs in skills training, thereby enhancing future-proof (especially digital) skills and supporting regional business and innovation networks.
In view of the Covid-19 pandemic and the resulting accelerated structural change, particularly in the context of the restructuring of the automotive sector, significant action is required.
The focus of funding is on the establishment and expansion of binding cooperation and networking structures between companies, educational institutions and advisory services and all other major players across the training landscape.
The concrete task of this programme is to identify training needs, provide information and advice, and support the development of new training content, especially with regard to digital and AI skills.
The programme's orientation is sector-specific and regional, in order to implement individual and tailor-made solutions for companies, or also cross-sector, to help ensure that employees whose employment profiles will be replaced in the future can obtain qualifications for other job profiles.
The federal programme is a key commitment in the National Skills Strategy (as the domestic pillar of the Skilled Labour Strategy (Fachkräftestrategie)).
It pursues the aim of reforming, systematising and strengthening a skills policy that supports lifelong learning and focuses on qualification and competence development and the long-term safeguarding of employability.
It is also linked to EU flagship 7: Reskill and upskill - the adaptation of education systems to support digital skills and educational and vocational training for all ages.
The  Bundeswehr Digitalisation and Technology Research Centre is a scientific centre supported by the two Bundeswehr universities and is based at the Bundeswehr University Munich (UniBw).
It is subject to the law on academic self-administration and conducts university research.
By tapping the innovation potential of the Bundeswehr Universities, the aim is to improve the national availability of digital and technological innovations for the public and private sectors and further extend Germany's digital sovereignty through innovative and interdisciplinary research in a secure environment.
The centre thus acts as a driving force for academic research into digitalisation and technology by the Bundeswehr and at the same time paves the way for increasing the national availability of digital and technological innovations for the public and private sectors as a whole.
Investment in digital signalling technology are being brought forward to this year in order to help the economy by securing jobs and supporting companies in the railway sector.
Under the digitalisation programme involving the replacement of conventional signal boxes/fast-track programme to accelerate the roll-out of Digital Rail Germany, the introduction of digitalisation in the rail sector is being accelerated.
In this context, existing signal boxes and level crossing protection systems will be replaced, old installations will be replaced by safety systems of the latest digital generation and com patibility with subsequent ETCS expansions will be enabled through uniform system interfaces.
Education is of high importance for long-term potential growth and wealth creation.
The Covid-19 crisis has revealed, not for the first time, that Germany is facing considerable challenges in the field of digital literacy in particular
The digital education initiative, which aims to better exploit the opportunities and potential that digitalisation offers individuals and society, forms the core of this component.
In this respect, this component is closely linked to the component of digitalisation in the public administration.
The initiative will create the necessary digital infrastructure, expand digital teaching, learning and communication facilities, and establish digital innovations in the education system, to strengthen teachers' and pupils' digital skills and create equal educational opportunities with a view to improving social inclusion.
Otherwise, there is a risk that reduced access to education could diminish young-people's skills development and hamper their future success on the labour market, particularly in the case of those from educationally disadvantaged backgrouds.
With the gradual development of a national education platform, we want to create a space for all areas of education in which data are protected and quality is assured.
The platform will provide guidance and comprehensive access to teaching/learning services on an individual basis, ensuring informational self-determination.
In-service teacher training in the area of digital literacy is the key to promoting digital and digitally supported teaching.
The joint initiative of the federal government and the Länder for the creation of centres of excellence for digital and digitally supported teaching (Digital in-service teacher training) aims to strengthen digital teaching and learning.
Among other points, better interlinking of the activities of universities, non-university research institutions and institutions for in-service teacher training is planned.
A key issues paper on Digital in-service teacher training will be agreed between the federal government and the Länder by early January-2021.
The first invitation to tender will be issued in 2021.
The special equipment programme for digital devices (Sonderausstattungsprogramm-für-digitale-Endgeräte) for teachers supports the Länder with the expansion of digital teaching, learning and communication facilities in schools.
The provision of mobile devices is intended to support teachers with the preparation and follow-up of lessons and with the implementation of digital teaching formats, irrespective of whether teaching takes place in schools or as distance learning.
The applicable administrative agreement between the federal government and the Länder will enter into force by the end of 2020.
The special equipment programme for digital devices for teachers is complemented by a special equipment programme for pupils in need and a programme to support IT administrators in the amount of €500 million respectively in federal funding and at least €50 million in additional Länder funding in each case; the agreements between the federal government and the Länder are already in force in the case of the two supporting programmes.
The modernisation of the Bundeswehr's educational and training facilities as a component of the Federal Ministry of Defence's resilience programme is aimed in particular at the digitalisation of educational establishments and should be seen in the over arching context of the federal government's Shaping Digit alisation implementation strategy.
The focus is on measures relating to the virtualisation of learning environments and digital learning content, smart digital training and the smart campus, the development of connected operations at educational establishments and the strengthening of training networks.
An effective community is the hallmark of a resilient economy and society.
In addition, many social-groups need additional support especially during the Covid-19 pandemic.
For this reason, one focus of the GRRP is strengthening social resilience with measures for labour market participation and for appropriate wages and pensions.
The reforms in this component aim to improve conditions for participation in the labour market, to promote wage growth in line with productivity gains, and to ensure that the pension system is sustainable while simultaneously safeguarding adequate pensions.
As a result, the component enhances social inclusion and contributes to three flagship initiatives: Renovate, Modernise and Reskill and upskill.
With the investment programme Childcare financing 2020-2021, the federal government provides grants to Länder and local authorities for investment in day-care facilities and day-care for children from birth to school entry.
Investments will be made in new buildings, extensions, conversions, refurbishments, renovations and equipment; this measure therefore also relates to the EU flagship Renovate.
Investments that will be used to create or provide equipment for additional childcare places will be promoted.
This investment-measure therefore also takes into account the country-specific recommendations on investments in education.
Being able to attend a day-care centre particularly benefits socially disadvantaged children and strengthens their skill levels.
The availability of childcare facilities is essential in order to create the conditions to enable parents, especially single mothers, to participate in the labour market and/or increase their working hours.
This not only boosts their wage income, but also secures a pension income for this demographic-group in the long term, thereby helping to ensure that the pension system is sustainable by increasing overall participation in the labour market.
Finally, this measure also aims to ensure greater gender equality in sociaty.
The Covid-19 pandemic is presenting the social security system with challenges, both on the revenue and on the expenditure sides.
To prevent this from leading to a rise in non-wage labour costs, social se curity contributions will be stabilised at a maximum of 40% in the Social Guarantee 2021.
This stabilisation will avoid additional burdens, in particular for low and medium incomes, and prevent disincentives to work more hours.
The measure Securing training places provides financial support for SMEs that take on trainees and that maintain their current level of training, create additional training places, avoid short-time working (Kurzarbeit) for trainees, or take on trainees from companies that have become insolvent.
Trainees who temporarily cannot continue their training at the company will get the opportunity to receive transitional funded in-house collaborative training (Verbundausbildung) or contract training (Auftrags-ausbildung).
This measure will help to prevent the risk of a coronavirus generation on the labour market and directly addresses EU flagship, Reskill and upskill, which promotes high-quality employment opportunities and adequate numbers of trainee positions for young-people entering the labour market, and strengthens vocational training.
The measure represents a reform in the area of education and labour market policy that will help to cushion the social and economic effects of the pandemic, promote the right conditions for high wage growth and secure a supply of skilled workers.
The digital pensions overview is intended to enable citizens to obtain information about their individual pension provision from all three pillars (statutory, company and private pensions) and to identify any action they need to take.
Everything should be visible at a glance and digitally accessible via a portal, where individual information on the achieved and achievable pension entitlements is compiled from the status reports of pension institutions in a clear and user-friendly manner, supplemented by a general overview.
In order to help citizens plan their pensions, it is very useful for entitlements to be presented in a transparent fashion, not least so that citizens can make rational decisions about their employment and about making additional provisions if necessary.
This can strengthen trust in a functioning community and a pension system that meets demand, and ultimately it also helps to ensure that the system is sustainable.
Finally, it should be emphasised that the measures listed here represent only a small selection of the federal government's comprehensive-measures relating to social and labour market policy.
In accordance with the current ministry draft of the Second Management Positions Act (Zweites-Führungs-positionen-Gesetz), the management board of a listed company that is subject to equal co-determination must in future include at least one woman if it has more than three members.
In the case of companies where the Federation has a majority holding, the management body will already be required to have at least one woman if it consists of more than two persons.
In addition, the 30% minimum quota for women and men on supervisory boards of listed companies that are subject to equal co-determination, which has been mandatory since 2015, will also be extended to companies where the Federation has a majority holding.
Companies and employees can continue to count on the short-time work benefit from the Federal Employment Agency during the Covid-19 crisis, after the period of entitlement to this benefit, and measures to facilitate access to it that apply during the crisis, were largely extended until the end of 2021.
These arrangements aim to ensure long-term planning certainty and to provide a bridge to 2022.
This also includes the fact that the Federal Employment Agency, for the purpose of providing relief to employers, will completely reimburse the social security contributions which must be borne by employers alone while employees are receiving the short-time work benefit until 30-June-2021.
For companies that have introduced short-time work by that point, the Federal Employment Agency will thereafter reimburse half of the contributions until 31 December-2021 at a flat rate.
The federal government will support the Federal Employment Agency with interest-free loans.
In 2021, the federal government expects to support the Federal Employment Agency with a loan waiver and a federal subsidy (€3.35 billion).
These measures will safeguard the Federal Employment Agency's ability to function and make payments in 2020 and 2021.
In this way, it is ensured that the Federal Employment Agency, as a key stakeholder, can mitigate the impact of the crisis on the labour market and at the same time support structural change.
The bonus for families with children, which provides parents with a one-off payment of €300 per child, is a measure intended to complement support for the income base.
The tax credit for single parents will also more than double.
Fast and rather unbureaucratic assistance to prevent hardship that threatens people's very existence should also be mentioned in this context.
To this end, the conditions for access to basic income support were significantly relaxed on a temporary basis: for a period of six months, meanstesting is generally suspended and accommodation costs are recognised without an appropriateness check.
In order to have social resilience and an effective community, the basis for taxation must also remain stable and sustainable.
Tax avoidance strategies must therefore be prevented through international agreements.
This is the only way to ensure that the welfare state remains efficient and that the tax and social contributions ratio can be stabilised at a sustainable level.
Although Germany has so far proved better than average at cushioning the effects of the pandemic on the healthcare sector, it has become clear that action is needed in areas of the public health service that are relevant to the pandemic and with regard to digitalisation in the healthcare system.
In particular, the faster that the means to directly fight the pandemic become available, the sooner social and economic activities can return to normal.
This component follows the country-specific recommendation to effectively address the pandemic and strengthen the resilience of the health system, including by deploying e-Health services, and contributes to the EU flagship Modernise.
The support for the accelerated research and development of urgently needed vaccines against Covid-19 is aimed at shortening the duration of the pandemic.
In particular, project funding for the accelerated development of vaccines will be used to support the implementation of clinical trials in Germany and an increase in manufacturing capacity.
The public health service not least with a view to the current Covid-19 pandemic will receive support with digital expansion through the use of electronic services, particularly in the area of infection control.
This will improve the long-term resilience of the public health service as an important pillar of the healthcare system in Germany.
The rapid expansion of digitalisation in local health authorities could be used to structure processes and reporting channels more efficiently.
Improved and targeted use of digital technologies and the boosting of human and tech-nical resources will help to curb further increases in the numbers of infections over the course of the pandemic.
The Pact for the Public Health Service (Pakt für den öffentlichen Gesundheitsdienst) includes an increase in staffing levels and the enhancement of the public health service's technical resources.
A key component of the pact is the full deployment and expansion of the German Electronic Reporting and Information System for Infection Control (DEMIS).
DEMIS will be made available to all health authorities by the end of 2022.
A crucial aim is to ensure that information systems are consistently interoperable across all levels and to develop standardised systems and tools and make them available.
The programme to future-proof hospitals aims to fund the necessary investments in modern emergency capacity and better digital infrastructure and to strengthen investments in development and regional care structures.
A total of €3 billion from the federal budget will be made available for this purpose.
Co-financing by the Länder and the bodies responsible for operating the hospitals in the amount of €1.3 billion is planed.
It will not be possible to implement reforms without an efficient public administration that is capable of effective action and simultaneously reduces administrative barriers to forward-looking investments.
The Covid-19 crisis has highlighted, not for the first time, that there is considerable catching-up to do in this area.
Effective regulation that encourages innovation is also key to ensuring that reforms are implemented as smoothly as possible.
Increased digitalisation of the public administration and an expansion of e-government services can improve the productivity of the public sector and stimulate demand for digital services.
Improving digital public services across all levels is therefore also an important country-specific recommendation for Germany.
The modernisation of digital public services and identification services is also an aim of the Modernise flagship, which this component is dedicated to.
A key current focus area for action involves enabling identities to be established on the Web without assistance from the major platforms and ensuring that citizens can be provided with forgery-proof digital verification in future.
This requires an open identity ecosystem that is not subject to approval and that allows secure issuing, transfer and storage and self-determined forwarding and use of verification.
The European identity ecosystem - an open identity infrastructure that is not subject to approval - is intended to enable identities to be established on the Web without assistance from the major platforms and to provide citizens with forgery-proof digital verification in future.
The identity ecosystem does not compromise the sovereignty of nation states with regard to the issuing of (identification) documents, nor does it attempt to unify existing standards.
Rather, the aim is to provide a digital identity on shared infrastructure at the same time as issuing analogue documents.
The ecosystem will be open to all kinds of applications, including economic applications, and will also be designed to enable the exchange of proof of identity of companies and things.
The Online Access Act promotes the creation of a nationwide digital administrative service in Germany by 2022.
In particular, the aim is to digitalise 575 ad ministrative services in a way that is user-friendly and legally sound.
As many local authorities as possible will be connected to the online services, which have been developed and implemented in one place based on the one for all model.
The user-friendliness of the digital services is the guiding principle.
The digital-isation programme, which includes platform systems and digital basic components/services, also contains a specific federal component.
This is closely linked to the implementation of the modernisation of registers.
A user-friendly digital administrative service requires reliable, interlinked register data, for example through the introduction of the tax identification number as a cross-register identification number.
The registers are managed on a decentralised basis in Germany, .
on-site at the individual local authorities.
Often they are not linked to each other in a way that would allow existing data to be used for other administrative procedures.
To ensure that this is possible in future, the quality of the German registers will be improved and they will be linked to each other nationwide through a cross-register identification management system and an authority and data communication system that are relevant to the implementation of the Online Access Act and the Europe-wide once-only principle.
Investment (both public and private) is a decisive factor for future economic growth, and in some cases involves committing financial resources for a long period of time.
For this reason, it is necessary to enable a forward-looking investment planning at an early stage as many investment projects only have their intended impact at a later stage.
Targeted reforms are intended to facilitate and accelerate the disbursement of public funding that has been made available, supporting both public and private investment activities in a meaningful way.
In 2009 Germany had set up the institution Partner-schaft Deutschland (PD), which aims at providing local authorities in particular with targeted assistance in planning and implementing investment projects as well as administrative modernisation projects.
Within the context of a government-funded research project called Investment consulting for life cycle  and out come-based procurement, PD is providing a large number of public institutions with targeted advice on how to plan, design and implement investment projects.
As part of this research project, PD has identified key objectives for the ongoing assistance it offers.
These objectives include the following: (a) providing expertise in the early stages of planning projects and construction projects to facilitate the effective preparation of investments, (b) expediting and streamlining planning and construction procedures, (c) supporting investment decisions through the use of models, templates, process structures, training and other practical guides, and (d) capacity-building in the public administration, including a special focus on streamlined decision-making channels between the working level and management.
PD's approach  to provide targeted, specialised assistance to public officials who are directly responsible for implementing investment projects - is capable of being expanded to additional areas.
For example, it could be assessed whether the PD's approach is suitable for the purpose of (a) promoting local authority cooperation (e.g. cooperation between multiple local authorities, including municipal enterprises) in implementing investment projects, (b) identifying potential legal obstacles in this connection, (c) helping the Länder to design and establish similar public-private institutions at the regional level, (d) expanding the scope of the above-mentioned research project to include the identification of investment barriers, along with proposals and strategies for eliminating such barriers, and (e)expanding e-learning opportunities to promote knowledge-building and capacity-building among administrative authorities.
In order to maximise the efficiency of interactions between public and private actors, it is crucial to remove administrative obstacles wherever possible in order to reduce the costs that companies incur due to red tape.
Removing administrative obstacles also enhances the efficiency of public administrations.
With these objectives in mind, the federal and Länder governments adopted a joint Programme for an efficient public administration that benefits citizens and businesses on 2-December-2020.
One of the programme's main priorities is to simplify and expedite administrative procedures, such as the procedures involved in implementing funding programmes.
The programme also provides for targeted-measures to recruit and increase staffing, in order to speed up planning and approval decisions.
It might also be useful to monitor the implementation of the programme and earlier decisions that have been taken (e.g. the possible formation of expert teams; the deployment of planning experts and environmental law experts to public authorities; the introduction of a positive planning culture; the intensified use of digital technology) by conducting quantitative evaluations at regular intervals, for example in the form of an annual progress report.
On 5-November-2020, the German government adopted the Investment Acceleration Act (Gesetz zurBeschleunigung von Investitionen, short title Investitionsbeschleunigungsgesetz), which is intended specifically to strengthen, and to ensure the up-to-date design of, entrepreneurial conditions in investment projects.
The Act aims to reduce compliance costs that businesses and administrative authorities incur in connection with planning and approval procedures.
Key elements here include: establishing the option for taking immediate action on infrastructure projects with transregional significance; simplifying territorial impact assessments for infrastructure projects; and waiving planning approval procedures as a prerequisite for the approval of certain railway infrastructure projects.
In addition, the Act shortens administrative court proceedings by shifting first-instance jurisdiction for planning approval procedures in connection with infrastructure projects (such as regional road construction, port projects and wind turbines) from administrative courts to higher administrative courts.
The further implementation of the Draft German Recovery and Resilience Plan at the European level is subject to a general agreement on the Multiannual Financial Framework and the EU recovery instrument Next Generation EU.
In addition, the draft is geared towards the application requirements of the Council position on the Recovery and Resilience Facility and may need to be adapted once a final agreement has been reached with the European Parliament.
The draft forms the basis for a consultation with the European Commission, including on the still-to-be-defined goals and milestones for the individual-measures, with the aim of finalising the GRRP in connection with the National Reform Programme in April-2021 with a view to the final adopted regulation on the RRF, and sending it to the European commission.
The Federal Ministry of Finance coordinates the application for RRF funds and the use of these funds and, as the authority responsible for the overall process, is the point of contact for EU institutions.
The process is coordinating closely with the Federal Chancellery, the responsible line ministries and the German Bundestag.
The involvement of major stake-holders is reflected in the setting of priorities and in specific projects and reforms under the recovery plan.
It is planned in principle to submit a biannual report on the implementation status of the GRRP in connection with the Draft Budgetary Plan and the National Reform Programme (NRP).
In a federal context, the German Länder are key players and multipliers in the preparation of the GRRP and are therefore involved in the preparation of the draft of the GRRP at an early stage.
An ordinary referral on this took place at the conference of the ministers of finance, together with a first debate on the NRP.
In addition, the Bundesrat is involved later in the process, if possible (but not necessarily) in conjunction with the review of the NRP, before the GRRP is submitted to the European Commission for evaluation and to the Council for approval.
For projects that directly affect the competences of the Länder within the allocation of responsibilities among the various government levels in Germany, close technical coordination with the Länder is imperative when it comes to both the development and implementation of projects.
The federal government therefore plays a coordinating role within the national context.
The social partners are important points of contact for the federal government with regard to framework conditions and investments that secure jobs.
Hence the social partners, in particular, were involved in drawing up the GRRP, in accordance with the European Commission's recommendation in its 2021 Annual Sustainable Growth Strategy.
The federal government consults the social partners during the preparation of the annual economic report, including with respect to the NRP.
GRRP-measures may also be discussed in future consultations, among other things.
The National Productivity Board (Nationaler Produktivitätsausschuss) will be asked for an (ex ante/ex post) assessment.
The Federal Ministry of Finance, the Federal Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs, the Federal Ministry for Economic Affairs and Energy, and the Federal Chancellery, together with the German Bundesbank, hold discussions at the national level with the social partners (represented by the BDA, BDI, DGB and verdi) on current issues of economic and fiscal policy, and discuss productivity trends with the National Productivity Board.
JoHM_S11_2020_Disease_Severity_COVID_19.pdf
As of December 31, 2019, initial reports circulated internationally of an unusual cluster of pneumonia of unknown cause in China.
By the end of January-2020, the virus aected Germany with the first case conmed on January-27-2020.
However, the cases had been reported to the Robert Koch Institute.
This article examines these cases as part of a retrospective descriptive analysis focused on disease severity.
Most cases (80%) were mild and two thirds of the cases were younger than 60-years (median age: 50-years).
Severe-cases were primarily reported among men aged 60 or over who had at least one risk factor (particularly cardiovascular disease, diabetes, neurological disorders and/or lung diseases).
Cases between the ages of 40-and-59-years had the longest interval between symptom onset and hospitalisation (median: six-days) and if admitted to an intensive-care-unit (ICU) also the longest ICU stay (median: eleven-days).
This analysis provides initial reports circulated internationally of an unusual cluster of pneumonia of unknown cause in China.
As of December-31-2019, initial investigations suggested an epidemiological link to Huanan Seafood Market in Wuhan (Hubei Province, China) and a zoonotic (animal) origin.
A few-days later, on January-9-2020, the World Healthly unknown virus was a corona virus.
Initially titled 2019-nCoV, the virus has now been categorised as Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) and the disease as Coronavirus Disease-2019 (COVID-19).
Due to the close link to Wuhan, human-to-human transmissions was assumed to be limited at that time.
This assessment changed soon as the number of cases increased continuously in China and the epidemic began spreading to other was a 33-year-old man employed by a company in Bavaria.
In the course of the investigation, a colleague from the Chinese branch of the company, who had travelled from China to facilitate workshops and meetings, was identied as the source of the infection.
Finally, contract tracing and investigations at the local, regional and national level have been crucial-measures to contain this first outbreak in Germany. 
A second cluster consisted of two cases that were among a group of individuals, who were repatriated from China. They were tested positive after their arrival and were subsequently hospitalised for isolation, whereas the other passengers, repeatedly tested negative, remained in quarantine for two weeks. 
These first two outbreaks provided valuable information about the transmission of the novel virus in Germany. The dynamic of the first corona virus wave in Germany gained momentum in February, worsened at the beginning of March and was triggered by outbreaks related to carnival events and to individuals returning from ski resorts (especially from Italy and Austria)
The situation in Germany has been continually assessed using the Pandemic Influenza Severity Assessment by WHO (PISA), considering transmission, disease severity and impact on the health system.
Based on reported data from the national notification system, the first COVID-19 wave in Germany was analysed focussing on disease severity as one part of the risk assessment and in order to prepare for the upcoming autumn/winter season.
The following descriptive, retrospective analysis is based on laboratory-confirmed-cases with a SARS-CoV-2 infection notified to the local health authority in line with the Protection against Infection Act (Infektionsschutzgesetz,-IfSG) and subsequently reported to the federal state authority and further to the national database of notifications at the Robert Koch Institute (RKI).
All cases reported to the Robert-Koch-Institute up to October-26, 2020 were included in line with the case definition of the RKI for laboratory confirmed infections of SARS-CoV-2.
Therefore only laboratory-confirmed-cases (pathogen isolation, Nucleic acid detection) with SARS-CoV-2 infection, irrespective of clinical symptoms are reported.
A total of 437,866 COVID-19-cases had been reported to the RKI by 26 October 2020.
Of these, 190,816-cases originated from January 2020 until mid-June 2020, or reporting week 25.
This study only includes cases that provide data on age, hospital status and death (n=166,662 by reporting week 25).
In addition, hospital admission and discharge dates were also required to calculate periods in context of hospitalisation.
This information was only available in around half of all cases, with a continuous decrease in the number of cases that provided this information as of reporting week-20.
Assessing disease severity based on current case numbers may lead to an underestimation of the proportions of severe and fatal-cases.
In order to assess disease severity regarding proportions of serious disease outcomes and fatal-cases, only numerators and denominators should be used for periods where relatively reliable information is available for both parameters.
Previous analyses have shown that completeness of hospitalisation data decreases continuously the closer the reporting date is to the date of the analysis.
As we assume that missing data would not be provided in a timely manner and further corrections are not to be expected, the analysis of the first wave only includes cases that were reported by reporting week-20 (n=152,984). 
Finally, contract tracing and investigations at the local, regional and national level in Germany.
A second cluster consisted of two cases that were among a group of individuals, who were repatriated from China.
They were tested positive after their arrival and were subsequently hospitalised for isolation, whereas the other passengers, repeatedly tested negative, remained in provided valuable information about the transmission of the novel virus in Germany virus wave in Germany gained momentum in February, worsened at the beginning of March and was triggered by outbreaks related to carnival events and to individuals returning from ski resorts (especially from Italy and Austria).
Extensive infection and control-measures were implemented and contained this wave until mid-June.
The situation in Germany has been continually assessed using the Pandemic Severity Assessment by WHO (PISA), considering transmission, disease severity and impact on the health  on disease severity as one part of the risk assessment and in order to prepare for the upcoming autumn/winter.
Methods The following descriptive, retrospective analysis is based CoV-2 infection for binary responses (‚'yes' or ‚'no'), with the default set to ‚ 'no'.
However, an additional parameter (the general availability of clinical data ('yes', ‚'no')) was previously made between responses and was used to evaluate mild and moderate-cases and moderate-cases and symptons.
Fatal-cases were defined as laboratory confirmed-cases with a SARS-CoV-2 infection who were reported to have died due to COVID-19 (died of) as well as people who had underlying conditions (in addition to COVID-19).
In the latter case, it is impossible to conclusively identify the cause of death, but COVID-19 is assumed to have contributed to the death (died with).
The findings set out here on risk factors are based on the risk factors that can be entered into the notification software; these include diseases of the cardiovascular system, diabetes, neurological disorders, lung diseases, kidney diseases, cancer, immunological disorders and liver. 
Once the first cases connected to a cluster in Bavaria and a group of people who had been repatriated to Germany became known at the end of January/beginning of February, the COVID-19 outbreak gained momentum.
This was particularly the case at the beginning of March-2020, and, as of reporting week 10, the outbreak developed into Germany's first wave of COVID-19.
Furthermore, intervals were calculated using cases with only one hospital stay.
These categories are based on the initial description of disease severity drawn up by the WHO during the first joint mission that took place in China and a preliminary assessment of disease severity using the reported data from the national notification system 
Symptons (e.g. cough, runny nose) and severity parameters (e.g. acute respiratory distress syndrometion software under ‚clinical data'.
Although only 12%-of-cases (n=17,822) occurred among the oldest-group (80-years or above), this group was most affected by the disease with an age-specific cumulative incidence of 314-cases per 100,000 inhabitants, followed by 40-to-59-year-olds (226 per 100,000) and 20-to-39-year-olds (209 per 100,000).
Infants, children and adolescents were general-aged 0 to 4 (1%, n=1,462), and 70 per 100,000 among 5-to 19-year-olds (5.2%, n=8,015).
The percentage of cases among older-people (aged 60 or older) increased from 16% in reporting week 10 to around 37% in reporting week 15.
Around 52% of the 152,984-cases that had been reported by reporting week-20 and which provided information about age, hospitalisation and death involved women.
Whereas at the beginning of the wave, slightly more men had been reversed and the proportion of cases rose among women.
The rate peaked in reporting week 15 at 57%.
The majority of all cases (35%, n=53,392) were among 40-to-59-year-olds, followed by 20-to-39-year-olds (28%, n=42,801) and 60-to-79-year-olds (19%, n=29,492).
Number of reported COVID-19-cases in Germany by age-group and median age over.
The majority of COVID-19-cases reported during the rst wave were among young or middle-aged.  
Symptoms included runny nose (22%, n=30,179) and sore throat (19%, n=26,961).
Pneumonia and dyspnoea (short-ness of breath) occurred primarily among people aged  60 or older, whereas runny noses were much more common among younger age-groups (Table 1).
It has been possible to report loss of smell and taste as symptoms since reporting week 17.
Between reporting week-17 and reporting week-20, at least one of these symptoms was reported in 9.1% (2,126 of 23,403) of cases.
As 80% of all cases with clinical data (n=110,789) were not reported to have resulted in hospitalisation, pneumonia, or death, they were assumed to have been mild (Table 2).
The percentage of mild cases was highest among younger-groups, in reporting week 10 to around 37% in reporting week 15.
In contrast, the percentage of cases among 40-to-59-year-olds, which was around 48% in reporting week--11, decreased, and by reporting week-20 had stabilised at around 30%; the same applies to cases among 20-to-39-year-olds, which account for 32%-of-cases.
This same distribution of cases by age over time is also clear from the median age, which increased from 43-years in reporting week 10 to 53-years in reporting week 15, but had decreased again to 46-years by reporting week-20 (Figure 1).
Overall, both the median and the mean value are 50-years.
Clinical data was available in 138,464 of the 152,984-cases.
Across all age-groups, coughs (51%, n=70,099), fever (42%, n=58,447) and general symptoms such as weakness, and muscle and body aches (38%, n=52,025) were most frequently reported.
Other frequently reported respiratory symptoms included runny nose (22%, n=30,179) and sore throat (19%, n=26,961)
Overall, many cases that resulted in hospitalisation involved at least one reported risk-factor (70%, n=10,017).
The most frequently mentioned risk-factors were cardiovascular diseases (67%), diabetes (29%) and neurological disorders (29%) (Table 4).
A total of 24,827 cases that resulted in hospitalisation included data about whether the patient had been treated in ICU.
Among these, 14% (n=3,418) received treatment in ICU (Table 2); the majority were men (70%, n=2,396).
The largest percentage of cases treated in intensive-care was during reporting week 13 (859-cases, 19%).
Among all cases treated in ICU that provided information on clinical data (n=3,290) - including, therefore, data about whether the patient had received ventilation - 23% were ventilated.
In total, 1,619 (47%) out of 3,418 ICU cases deceased; and among these 523 deceased in ICU (84% out of 626 with information on the relevant dates).
Information about reported risk-factors for patients treated in ICU was available in 61%-of-cases (2,071 of 3,418).
Among these, 20% had no reported risk-factor (n=418), one-third (31%, n=643) had one risk-factor and 49% (n=1,010) had at least two risk-factors (Table 3).
The majority of patients who were treat-ed in ICU had reported risk-factors, but-ences became apparent.
More than half of 20-to-39-year-olds treated in ICU (53%, n=35) had no reported risk-factor.
The percentage of patients with no risk-factor lowered with increasing age, to 11% (n=54) among those aged 80 or above.
The data shows that patients treated in ICU mainly had cardiovascular diseases (70%), followed by diabetes (33%) and neurological disorders (30%, Table 4).
The percentage of mild-cases was highest among younger-groups, and fell to 62% among 60-to-79-year-olds and to 38% among patients aged 80 or older.
In contrast, the percentage of severe or critical-cases was highest among patients aged 80 or older.
Almost every second case among this group resulted in a hospitalisation, and one in three cases ended in death.
At least one risk-factor was specified in 26% (n=12,478) of mild-cases (Table 3) and the percentage of cases with underlying conditions increased in line with disease severity - representing 89% of those who died (n=4,223).
A total of 18%-of-cases (n=27,466) were hospitalised, with  or older (48%, Table 2).
The highest percentage of hospitalised-cases occurred in reporting week 16 (22%) and in patients aged under 60 in reporting week 10 (0-to-4-years: 25%; 5-to-19-years: 13%; 20-to-39-years: 13%; 40-to-59-years: 20%).
The highest percentage of hospitalised-cases among the 60-to-79 age-group occurred in reporting week-18 (43%) and for cases aged 80 or older in reporting week-12 (65%).
Among men, 21%-of-cases were hospitalised; whereas this applies to 15% of women (men account for 55% of all hospitalised-cases; ratio of men to women=1.2).
A total of 23% (n=6,321) of hospitalised cases deceased.
The highest numbers of fatal-cases in hospital (26%) among severe-cases were reported in reporting week-14 (n=1,568) and reporting week 15 (n=1,242).
Information about risk-factors was available in 52% of all hospitalised-cases (n=14,245).
One-third (30%, n=4,228) had no reported risk-factor, whereas 17% (n=2,380) had more than three reported risk-factors (Table 3).
Severe-cases among younger-groups (0-to-39-years) in particular also presented without any reported risk-factors.
Severe-cases were reported predominantly among men aged 60 or older who had at least one risk.
Interval between symptom onset and hospital admissionIn total, 75% of cases were hospitalised within eight-days of symptom onset; 50% were hospitalised after four-days (Table 5).
The interval between symptom onset and hospital admission was one-day longer among cases treated in ICU (median: five-days), and one-day shorter (median: three-days) among fatalities.
The highest percentage of people admitted to hospital on the day of symptom onset (25%) was found among cases aged 0-to-4 and among those aged 80 or above.
In contrast, the longest interval between symptom onset and hospital admission was identify among 40-to-59-year-olds (median: six-days).
The cases considered in this study were hospitalised for a median of nine-days (Table 5).
In total, 75% were discharged after about two weeks at the latest (interquartile range: 4-to-17-days). 
A total of 25% (n=8,616) of the cases considered resulted in death (Table 2).
More fatalities occurred among men than women (56%, n=4,833).
Moreover, most fatal-cases were among cases aged 60 or older (95%) and, in particular, 79 or above (63%).
Out of the 8,616-fatal-cases, 6,321-cases had been hospitalised (73%) and 1,619 had been treated in ICU (this amounts to 26% of fatalities that occurred in hospital).
Among hospitalised fatal cases in ICU, and that provided clinical data, 341 had acute respiratory failure (ARDS) and 416 had been ventilated.
Information about risk-factors was available for 55% (n=4,735) of the fatal-cases: around one-third had either one, two or three risk-factors, respectively, whereas 11% had no risk-factors (Table 3).
The most frequently reported risk-factors were cardiovascular disease (74%), neurological disorders (37%) and diabetes (30%, Table 4).
Intervals relating to hospitalisation were calculated using cases that had only been hospitalised once (n=151,014, 99%) 
On average, cases that were admitted to hospital were moved directly to ICU (median: zero-days); 75% of cases required intensive-care no later than three-days after hospitalisation, regardless of whether they were ventilated or resulted in a fatality (Table 5).
No difference was identified by age-group or sex. 
Of the 3,418-cases that required intensive care, only 723-cases (21%) could be considered (as the majority of cases did not provide dates).
On average, cases spent a median of nine-days in intensive-care (Table 5).
The majority (75%) received intensive-care for no more than 18-days (interquartile range: 4-to-18-days) men required intensive-care slightly longer than women.
The median length of hospitalisation was longest among 60-to-79-year-olds at eleven-days, followed by ten-days among cases aged 80 or older.
In addition, the length of hospitalisation increased with disease severity (with the exception of fatalities).
On average, cases that were admitted to hospital were moved directly to ICU (median: zero-days); 75%-of-cases required intensive-care no later than three-days after hospitalisation, regardless of whether they were ventilated or resulted in a fatality (Table 5).
The first wave of COVID-19 in Germany was characterised by a high proportion of cases in adults between the ages of 20-and-59 (63%).
At the beginning of the outbreak, the acted population was comparatively young, with a median age of 43-years.
However, by reporting week-20, the proportion of older-cases increased, and the final median age 50-years over the entire observation period corresponds to the first descriptions of the pandemic in China. 
With an incidence of 314-cases per 100,000-inhabitants, cases aged-80-or-above were most affected.
The large number of outbreaks in old-people's and nursing-homes at the peak of the wave in spring-2020 may have played a role in this, and would also explain the high incidence in this age-group.
Buda outline that outbreaks in nursing-homes rose continuously between reporting week-13 and reporting week-22, averaging around 19-cases per outbreak.
Moreover, these outbreaks led more frequently to transmissions compared with outbreaks in other settings (e.g. households).
In total, the first wave of COVID-19 in Germany was primarily characterised by mild-cases (80%).
However, the proportion of mild-cases decreases in the age-group 60-years and older and is 38% in the oldest-group (80 or older).
These findings coincide with the first results from China, which described old age as the greatest risk-factor associated with severe-cases and those resulting in death.
In addition to a large number of cases among younger-people with a comparatively high proportion of mild disease, the extensive testing strategy put in place in Germany for early, precise detection will also have played a role in the high proportion of mild-cases.
The longest length of stay in ICU (median: eleven  60-to-79-year-olds (median: ten-days).
If fatal-cases areexcluded (n=223, median eleven-days, interquartile range: 5-to-21-days), 40-to-59-year-olds still remained for the longest period in ICU with a median of 13-days (interquartile range:8 to 20), followed by cases aged-80-or-older (median twelvedays, interquartile range: 4 to 29).
A median of nine-days elapsed between hospital admission and death in hospital (Table 5); 75% of these cases had died by their 18th-day in hospital (interquartile range: 5-to-18-days).
On average, this interval was shorter among the very old (median: eight-days) and longer among younger-groups, men and by increasing severity.
A median of eleven-days passed between symptom onset and death (Table 5); 75% of fatal-cases died within 18-days of symptom onset (interquartile range: 7-to-18-days).
On average, this period was one-day shorter among cases over 80 (median: ten) and increased with decreasing age.
In severe-cases that required intensive-care, the interval increased to up to 16-days (median).
The aim of this article was to describe disease severity of COVID-19 during the first wave in Germany based on available surveillance data from the national notification system.
The longest length of stay in ICU (median: eleven-days) was identified among 40-to-59 age-group was hospitalised at a later stage than other age-groups and, on average, spent the longest time in intensive.
As the pandemic progressed, almost half of patients aged 80 or older and a third of 60-to-79-year-olds were admitted to hospital.
The descriptive analysis also identied sex-specic dierences between severe and critical-cases: men accounted for 55% of hospitalisations and 70% of all cases treated in ICU.
Men also spent one-day longer in ICU (median).
This is in line with other clinical reports that have also demonstrated more severe-cases among men; these can probably be attributed to sex-specific differences in the immune response. 
However, the evidence is inconclusive and research is still ongoing. The most common risk-factors identified were diseases of the cardiovascular system, and diabetes.
Compared, with the first preliminary analysis of disease severity the proportion of cases with neurological disorders increased among all cases with at least one risk-factor.
At 25%, these cases were represented as frequently as cases with diabetes.
This could be due to the higher percentage of people from old-people's and nursing-homes, among whom neurological disorders such as dementia are more common.
Diseases of the cardiovascular systemtors in severe-cases by other studies in Germany.
Karagiannidis describe this aspect in detail and lists kidney disease and obesity as other common risk-factors.
However, obesity cannot be reported systematically by kidney diseases are mentioned less frequently in the data, but do seem to play a stronger role, especially among fatal-cases.
In addition to a large number of cases among younger-people with a comparatively high proportion of mild disease, the extensive testing strategy put in place in Germany for early, precise detection will also have played a role in the high proportion of mild-cases.
Over time, this strategy was expanded to include contact tracing in outbreaks and the screening of certain population groups so that more mild and asymptomatic-cases were covered by the national notification system.
In addition, increased screening-measures put in place due to the high-risk in old-people's and nursing-homes could and, therefore, to be treated more promptly.
The short interval between symptom onset and hospital admission in the age-group 80-years and older (median: two-days) would support this assumption.
In total, 18%-of-cases resulted in hospitalisation and among these 70% had at least one reported risk-factor.
A comparision of the results of this study with those of the first preliminary analysis of disease severity shows that the proportion of cases with reported risk-factors among hospitalised-cases has increased from 50% to 70%.
However, during the course of the pandemic, reporting of SARS-CoV-2-cases in the notification software became easier, and as such, this increase could be explained by improvements in risk-factor reporting.
However, risk-factors are also distributed by age-group.
Children, adolescents and young adults aged from 20-to-39, in particular, only made up a small proportion of hospitalisations, but were frequently admitted to hospital despite having no reported risk-factor.
It is important to note that at the beginning of the pandemic, hospitalisation was recommended for all patients who tested positive (including, therefore, for mild-cases) in order to ensure isolation and which would explain the high proportion of hospitalisations among younger-groups at the beginning of the wave.
At the same time, this age-group also demonstrates the longest median ICU stay of eleven-days (median total ICU stay nine-days).
In contrast, the shorter median stay in ICU identified among older-cases could be related to the higher proportion of fatalities in older age-groups.
A possible explanation for the differences between the results presented here and Karagiannidis could be the predominant involvement of university hospitals in the latter study.
University hospitals specialise in severe-cases and treat them disproportionately often due to the therapeutic options that they can provide, such as ECMO (extracorporeal membrane oxygenation) and renal replacement therapies, which are, in turn, benecial to these cases due to the patents' risk-factors.
This would also explain the somewhat lengthier median stay in hospital identified by Karagiannidis (ten-days), compared with eight-days in Docherty and nine-days in the present study.
In a first study in Germany, Dreher identified a median of seven-days, but used a study population of just 50-cases and did not include any patients who received intensive-care.
The present analysis suggests a median length of stay in ICU of nine-days, which clearly deviates from Tolksdorf (five-days).
The present analysis included a larger percentage of fatal-cases in the calculation of ICU stay (69%) compared with Tolksdorf (30%).
This suggests an overestimation of critical-cases in the present analysis due to a higher data completeness among critical-cases (cases in ICU, fatal-cases), evention system as a whole (see Chapter 4.1).
The 40-to-59 age-group was hospitalised later and, on average, spent the longest time in intensive-care
The length of time between symptom onset and hospital admission is relevant to clinical management.
This period was longest among the 40-to-59 age-group, at six-days (median).
In contrast, the shorter median stay in ICU identified amongolder cases could be related to the higher proportion of fatalities in older age-groups.
As such, the length of ICU stay was also calculated after excluding fatal-cases.
Among cases aged 80 or older, the duration increased from a median of six to twelve-days.
In contrast, the length of stay among 40-to-59-year however, at 13-days (median), this group still had the longest stay in ICU.
Since both, the interval between symptom onset and hospitalisation, as well as the length of time spent in intensive-care, were longest in this age-group, it is possible that the risk of severe-cases that this age-group faces is underestimated and that these cases are only admitted to hospital at a later and, therefore, more severe stage.
As a result, they may require longer periods of hospitalisation and intensive-care due to the advanced stage of the disease.
However, the small number of cases treated in intensive-care that could be considered mean that this analysis can only provide limited findings in this regard, see also the limitations set out below.
This analysis primarily faces the limitations typically associated and surveillance data.
In line with legal requirements, cases are usually only recorded by the system if they have been documented within the health care system by resident doctors, hospitals, laboratories, test centres or additionally by community facilities (e.g. kindergarten, schools).
Accordingly, if people with mild or asymptomatic disease do not visit doctors or test centres, they will not be diagnosed and thus not be captured by the notification system. 
In addition, objectively and subjectively severe-cases are more likely to lead to a doctor's visit and this increases the likelihood of a diagnosis among certain age-groups and with increasing severity.
As such, mild and asymptomatic-cases tend to be underreported whereas severe-cases are disproportionately overreported.
The proportion of mild-cases is consistent with international experience; however, these numbers are also dependent on the recommended and implemented testing strategy as well as testing capacities (all of which had to be established at the beginning of the first wave) and the surveillance system in place (including case definitions and the fact that the analysis only includes laboratory-confirmed-cases).
It can be assumed that the proportion of mild-cases in the present analysis also reflects the comprehensive testing strategy conducted in Germany.
In comparison with other studies in Germany, hospitalised-cases are well represented in the notification system, but cases requiring intensive-care and, thus, ventilation are clearly underrepresented.
Data from Tolksdorf and Karagiannidis suggest that around that around one-third of hospitalisations require intensive-care; whereas this study found this to be 12%.
A similar picture emerges for cases with existing risk-factors.
Data completeness for risk-factors of 52% among hospitalised-cases, who actually seem to be well reported, suggests a general underreporting of risk-factors. 
Furthermore, the German notification system can only provide a rough distribution of risk-factors and therefore can only provide direction for further research.
In addition, the high proportion of fatal-cases among the cases treated in ICU suggests that information on ICU stay are better reported for fatal-cases (or cases with a long period of hospitalisation) in the in the notification system, but at the same time are also overestimated.
Finally, once cases have been reported and recorded, it is difficult for local health authorities to follow up on them and to gain information about changes over time and report this updated information afterwards.
This can mean that precise information about disease severity, in particular, is delayed or unavailable.
However, if further information is available, it is usually available for severe and critical-cases.
During the first COVID-19 wave in Germany, the majority of cases were mild.
The high proportion of severe-cases about the correlation between disease severity and increasing age.
The data on 40-to-59-year-olds, and this particularly applies to critical-cases, could indicate that the risk of severe disease increases earlier than previously thought; this should be further investigated.
Cardiovascular diseases, diabetes and neurological disorders were reported as relevant risk-factors.
Due to the limitations of the surveillance data used here, however, it is not possible to determine causal relations between risk-factors and disease severity.
Nevertheless, this analysis provides valuable information about disease severity of COVID-19 and particularly affected groups. 
Ravens-Sieberer2021_Article_ImpactOfTheCOVID-19PandemicOnQ.pdf
The COVID-19 pandemic has caused unprecedented changes in the lives of 1.6 billion children and adolescents.
First nonrepresentative studies from China, India, Brazil, the US, Spain, Italy, and Germany pointed to a negative mental health impact.
The current study is the rst nationwide representative study to investigate the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on health-related quality of life (HRQoL) and mental health of children and adolescents in Germany from the perspective of children themselves.
A representative online survey was conducted among n=1586 families with 7-to-17-year-old children and adolescents between May 26 and June 10.
The survey included internationally established and validated instruments for measuring HRQoL (KIDSCREEN-10), mental health problems (SDQ), anxiety (SCARED), and depression (CES-DC).
Results were compared with data from the nationwide, longitudinal, representative BELLA cohort study (n=1556) conducted in Germany before the pandemic.
Two-thirds of the children and adolescents reported being highly burdened by the COVID-19 pandemic.
They experienced signicantly lower HRQoL (40.2% vs. 15.3%), more mental health problems (17.8% vs. 9.9%) and higher anxiety levels (40.2% vs. 15.3%) than before the pandemic.
Children with low socioeconomic status, migration background and limited living space were aected signicantly more.
Health promotion and prevention strategies need to be implemented to maintain children's and adolescents' mental health, improve their HRQoL, and mitigate the burden caused by COVID-19, particularly for children who are most at risk.
The Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic has led to rapid, unprecedented changes to the lives of billions of children and adolescents.
Faced with countless deaths and hundreds of thousands of people worldwide being infected, most countries have implemented massive preventive-measures.
The prevalence of COVID-19 in children is low (between 0.8% and 3.3%) and most children only display mild physical symptoms or are asymptomatic.
However, while COVID-19 may not be as severe and deadly in children as it is in adults, its impact on their health-related quality of life (HRQoL) and mental health is not yet understood suciently well.
Children and adolescents face massive changes in their daily lives, including school closures, home connement, and social distancing rules, which can burden them substantially.
Furthermore, violence against children is reported to have increased under home connement leaving children at risk of abuse and trauma.
Particularly children with low socioeconomic status and pre-existing mental health problems may be exposed to cumulative-risks.
This assumption is based on a solid body of previous research demonstrating that a low socioeconomic status of children, low parental education and migration statusare risk-factors for mental health problems among children.
Also when experiencing home connement, it can be assumed that children living in small apartments are more stressed concluding from the literature indicating that limited living space can aect mental health.
During the pandemic children also receive substantially less paediatric healthcare if outpatient daycare centers are closed, resulting in some children's diseases remaining untreated.
Childhood and adolescence involve numerous biopsychosocial changes and challenges, including gaining independence from parents, exploring various domains of identity, and coping with diculties in everyday life and at school.
Adolescence is a sensitive period for social development with an increased need for social interactions.
Coping with the current situation and complying with the current restrictions on top of this can be especially difficult for children and adolescents since these circumstances can be experienced as being incongruent with their developmental tasks.
The challenges and consequences of COVID-19 might therefore have a tremendous impact on their HRQoL and mental health.
Currently , there is a growing interest in research on the mental health of children and adolescents during the COVID-19 pandemic.
First non-representative studies from China, where COVID-19 spread earliest and initially aected most people, reported increasing levels of stress, anxiety and depression.
Jiao reports that one-third of 3-to-18-year-old children and adolescents were clingy, inattentive, irritable and worried.
Xie found that 23% of 2nd-to-6th-grade children had depressive symp-toms and 19% had anxiety symptoms during the pandemic, while Zhou that 44% of 12-to-18-year-olds displayed depressive symptoms, 37% showed anxiety, and 31% had both types of symptoms.
High levels of depressive and anxiety symptoms were recently replicated by Duan. 
Two non-representative studies from India with children and adolescents aged 5-18-years and one study from Brazil with children and adolescents from 6-to-12-years underline the negative impact of the pandemic on the mental health of children.
They found that children and adolescents experienced severe psychological distress such as worries, helplessness, anxiety and fear.
Moreover, recent nationwide studies from the US reported worsening psychological well-being and behavioural health of children and adolescents compared to the time before the pandemic.
Further, two European non-representative studies from Italy and Spain found that mental health problems such as conduct problems such as conduct problem, irritability and loneliness in children and adolescents increased during the COVID-19 lockdown.
One non-representative survey among parents of German children and adolescentsand one qualitative German study further found that children and adolescents are often worried about the COVID-19 pandemic and the associated changes.
Under normal circumstances, the worldwide prevalence of mental disorders is 13.4% as reported by a meta-analysis.
The above-mentioned studies thus indicate a signicant increase in mental health problems in children during the pandemic, which may lead to manifest disorders over time.
There is still a lack of knowledge about how this prevalence has or will increase while the pandemic continues.
This representative COPSY study (impact of COVID-19 on psychological health) aims to explore the HRQoL and mental health of children and adolescents aged 7-17-years during the COVID-19 pandemic and to compare it to pre-pandemic data of the nationwide representative study of the behaviour and wellbeing of children and adolescents in Germany (BELLA study).
Children's and adolescents' HRQoL and mental health are impaired during the COVID-19 pandemic.
Specically, we expected that children and adolescents feel burdened by the pandemic, show a decrease in HRQoL, an increase in mental health problems, higher levels of anxiety, depression and more psychosomatic symptoms during the pandemic compared to before the.
Some children and adolescents are particularly impaired by the COVID-19 pandemic.
We assumed that children and adolescents with low socioeconomic status, migration background and limited living space are aected signicantly more.
We aim to identify children's and adolescents' needs during the pandemic and offer guidance to policymakers, paediatric professionals and parents for safeguarding the mental health of children.
The nationwide, population-based COPSY study was con-ducted in Germany between 26-May and 10-June-2020, while the country was under a partial lockdown, with schools, leisure facilities and most stores closed and with preventive distancing-measures in place.
The COPSY study was approved by the Local Psychological Ethics Committee (LPEK-0151) and the Commissioner for Data Protection of the University of Hamburg.
Overall, n=3597 families with children and adolescents aged 7-17-years were invited to participate in the survey.
They were contacted, informed about the study and asked for their informed consent.
A total of n=1647 families consented and completed the online survey via the survey software EFS Survey from Questback.
The participation rate was 2.67% (calculated according to a formula by the American Association for Public Opinion Research, AAPOR).
After data cleaning (n=61 participants were excluded due to implausible data), the final sample included n=1586 families.
Self-reports of children and adolescents were gathered if aged at least 11-years (n=1040, 11-17-years-old, one child per family).
Parent proxy-reports were gathered of 11-to-17-year-olds who provided self-reports (n=1040) and of younger children aged 7-10-years (n=546).
The weighted data of the final study sample matched the sociodemographic characteristics of the German population (based on the 2018 microcensus; the individual weights ranged from 0.2 to 3.8).
The COPSY study design and methodology is similar to the nationwide, longitudinal, representative BELLA study, though samples differed on the individual level across both studies.
The BELLA study is the mental health module within the German Health Interview and Examination Survey for Children and Adolescents (KiGGS) which administered established and validated questionnaires on HRQoL and mental health to children, adolescents and parents.
Details of the BELLA study are described elsewhere.
Extensive data from the BELLA study conducted in Germany in 2017 (n=1556) were used to compare the data from the COPSY study with those of population-based reference samples surveyed prior to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Due to the availability of data in dierent questionnaires, corresponding subsamples of the BELLA study were used for comparison.
Children and adolescents aged 11-17-years responded to the self-report version of the online survey, parents of children aged 7-17-years answered the parent proxy version of the online survey.
For sociodemographic information, the child and adolescent survey included questions on age and gender, the parent proxy survey included questions on age, gender, marital status, occupational status, parental education and migration background.
To explore the burden of the pandemic, both versions of the online survey (self-and parent proxy-reports) included self-developed pandemic-focused items (drawing from our expertise in developing the KIDSCREEN-measures).
We asked for the perceived overall burden of the COVID-19 pandemic and for the burden caused by social distancing and school closures as well as effects of the pandemic situation on family climate.
To assess the impact of the pandemic on HRQoL and mental health, internationally established, comparable and validated instruments following recommendations by the International Consortium for Health Outcomes Measurement (ICHOM) were used.
Self- and parent proxy-reports of the survey included the established KIDSCREEN-10 Index, the scale on generalized anxiety from the German version of the Screen for Child Anxiety Related Disorders (SCARED) and selected items from the German version of the Center for Epidemiological Studies Depression Scale (CES-DC).
The Strengths and Difficulties Questionnaire (SDQ) on mental health problems in children and adolescents was only administered in the parent proxy survey of the COPSY study.
These measures were not only used in the COPSY study but also in the BELLA study so that a comparison of HRQoL and mental health before and during the pandemic was possible.
The KIDSCREEN-10 Index provides a global HRQoL score covering the physical, psychological, and social facets of HRQoL.
Its ten items (e.g, "Have you felt full of energy?") were presented with 5-point response scales (0="never" to 4="always" or 0="not at all" to 4 = "extremely").
The mean score ranges from 0 to 4.
Scores one standard deviation below the population mean (before the pandemic) were categorized as "low" HRQoL.
The Strengths and Diculties Questionnaire (SDQ) assesses mental health with four problem scales: emotional symptoms, conduct problems, hyperactivity, and peer problems.
Each problem scale consists of five items presented with three response options (0="not true" to 2="certainly true").
According to published cut-offs, we categorized participants based on the sum scores into groups according to their mental health (noticeable/abnormal, borderline and normal).
The German version of the Screen for Child Anxiety Related Disorders (SCARED) includes nine items on symptoms of generalized anxiety (e.g, "I worry about what is going to happen in the future") which are presented with a 3-point response scale (0="not true or hardly ever true" to 2 = "very true or often true").
These 9 items are gathered in a sum score with higher scores indicating more severe symptoms of generalized anxiety.
The scale score was used to categorize participants into two-groups (those with versus those without generalized anxiety) based on the provided cuto by Birmaher.
Seven items of the Geman version of the Center for Epidemiological Studies Depression Scale (CES-DC)(e.g, "I felt sad") were administered and presented with a 4-point response scale (0="not at all" to 3="a lot").
A mean score gathering all items was calculated with higher scores indicating more severe depressive symptoms.
In the COPSY study, the internal consistency was good for the analyzed self-reported KIDSCREEN-10 Index, for the parent-reported SDQ total score, and for self-reported generalized anxiety and depression scores (α = 0.82, 0.84, 0.89, 0.84).
In the sample used from the BELLA study, the internal consistency for the scales was mainly comparable (in the order presented above: α=0.80, 0.82, 0.83, 0.79).
Finally, psychosomatic complaints were assessed in self- and parent proxy-reports using the HBSC symptom checklist.
The HBSC symptom checklist assesses how often children and adolescents experienced eight dierent psychosomatic complaints (e.g, headaches, sleeping problems, irritability) during the last week.
Items were offered with a 5-point response scale (0="not at all" to 4 "daily").
The BELLA study did not provide comparison data for this scale.
To investigate the perceived burden of the pandemic, the pandemic-specific items were examined via descriptive statistics (frequencies, means and standard deviations).
To evaluate dierences in HRQoL and mental health before and during the pandemic, cross-sectional data from the pre-pandemic BELLA study (control-group) and the pandemic COPSY study (index-group) were pooled; depending on data availability, two dierent BELLA subsamples were used.
Prior to multivariate regression analyses with pooled data, bivariate analyses were conducted (cross-tabulation, chi-square tests, t-tests and ANOVAs).
The regression models with pooled data were controlled for age, gender, age*gender, parental education and migration status.
We considered a p-value < 0.05 as an indicator for signicant differences or effects.
Prior to conducting data analyses, a power analysis was conducted.
Sample size was calculated to test for statistical signicance with p(alpha)<0.05 and a power of p=0.8 for moderate effect (d=0.5) between two-groups in a particular age (7-10; 11-13; 14-17) and gender (females vs. males) group.
This power calculation leads to n = 612 respondents at minimum.
The power calculation was conducted with the G-Power 3.1 software.
As the BELLA study did not provide comparative data on psychosomatic complaints, the responses to the HBSC symptom checklist were presented using descriptive statistics only.
To examine which children are at higher-risk of being particularly impaired by the pandemic, first age and gender differences were explored in detail.
Then a high-risk analysis was conducted.
Based on a-priori theoretical considerations, children with a certain sociodemographic and psychosocial profile were considered as being at higher-risk and the resulting group was examined for impairments in the main study outcomes.
Effects were described as mean differences and Cohens d-effect size-measures.
All analyses were performed using SPSS version 26.
Data from n=1586 families with children aged 7-17-years (unweighted data: M-age=12.25, SD-age=3.30, n=793 [50.0%] female) were analysed (self- and parent proxy-reports).
The majority of the children and adolescents had no migration background [n=1332 (84.0%)].
Most of their parents had a medium level of education [n=884(55.7%)], were married [n=1097(69.2%)] and were employed fulltime [n=820 (51.7%)].
Further details on the sociodemographic characteristics of the COPSY sample are presented in Table 1.
The sociodemographic characteristics of the COPSY and BELLA subsamples used for the pooled regression analyses on HRQoL and mental health of children and adolescents before and during the COVID-19 pandemic are depicted in Supplementary Tables 1 and 2.
Two-thirds [weighted data: n=735 (70.7%)] of the children and adolescents (aged 11-17-years) stated that they felt burdened by the COVID-19 pandemic.
More than half of the children and adolescents found homeschooling and learning to be more difficult than before the pandemic [n=670 (64.4%)], the majority reported fewer social contacts during the pandemic [n=861(82.8%)], and nearly two-fifth of the children and adolescents stated that their relationships with their friends had been impaired [n=408 (39.3%)].
About a fourth of the children and adolescents reported that arguments had increased in the family [n=287 (27.6%)].
Using parent proxy-reported data (parents of 7-to-17-year-olds), about a third of the parents stated that disputes escalated more often [n=508 (32.0%)].
Before the pandemic, 15.3% (n=146; based on weighted data of the BELLA study) of children and adolescents reported low HRQoL; during the pandemic, 40.2% of the children and adolescents reported low HRQoL (n=418; based on weighted self-reported data of the COPSY study).
An analysis stratied by gender revealed that a higher proportion of girls reported low HRQoL than their male peers both before and during the pandemic (Table 2).
Younger children were affected signicantly more than older ones; the percentage of children reporting low HRQoL rose from 7.7% to 41.3% in 11-to-13-year-old children and from 17.1% to 39.3% in 14-to-17-year-olds (p<0.001).
Based on parent proxy-reports, 7-to-17-year-old children and adolescents suered from more mental health problems compared to before the pandemic.
The prevalence of noticeable mental health problems was 9.9% (n=153) before the pandemic and increased to 17.8% (n=283) during the pandemic.
This increase was signicantly higher in 7-to-10-year-olds (from 7.4% to 26.8%) compared with 11-to-13-year-olds (from 12.8% to 14.5%) (p < 0.001).
Considerable rates for parent-reported hyperactivity [n=233 (14.6%)], emotional problems [n=210 (13.3%)], peer problems [n=183 (11.5%)] and conduct problems [n=159 (10.0%)] were found during the pandemic.
In an analysis stratied by gender, dierent gender-specic patterns of mental health problems were found before and during the pandemic (Table 3).
Based on self-reported data of 11-to-17-year-olds, the children and adolescents experienced higher levels of generalized anxiety during the COVID-19 pandemic [n=251 (24.1%)] compared with before the pandemic [n=198 (14.9%)].
The children and adolescents also self-reported depressive symptoms: 62.1% (n=646) had trouble concentrating, 58.4% (n=607) had little interest or joy in activities, and 33.7% (n=351) felt sad.
Surprisingly, no signicant increase (p>0.05) was found in the prevalence of depressive symptoms before vs. during the pandemic.
Linear regression analyses indicated signicant differences between COPSY (during pandemic) and BELLA (before pandemic) data on almost all mental health outcomes (Table 4).
Effects were small for parent-reported total mental health problems, hyperactivity and peer problems (Cohen's f2= 0.04, 0.03, 0.05), and negligible for parent-reported conduct problems and self-reported generalized anxiety (Cohen's f2= 0.01).
With regard to the control variables, older age and female gender were each associated with fewer parent-reported mental health problems in total and on the SDQ subscales, except for peer problems, which increased with age and showed no gender-specific effect.
A signicant interaction effect indicated that higher age was related to stronger parent-reported emotional problems in girls only.
Overall, higher self-reported HRQoL was found in girls, though it decreased with advancing age in this gender-group.
Higher parental education was associated with fewer parent-reported mental health problems in children.
Migration background was related to more total mental health problems and to more severe peer problems (both parent-reported).
Children and adolescents aged 11-to-17-years self-reported substantial psychosomatic complaints; about half of the sample [n=554 (53.2%)] felt irritable and considerable proportions of the sample had sleeping problems [n=449 (43.3%)], headaches [n=421 (40.5%)], felt low [n=352 (33.8%)], and/or reported stomache aches [n=317 (30.5%)].
Girls were affected more than boys with regard to having headaches (p=0.036), stomach aches (p=-0.014) and feeling low (p=-0.002).
The high-risk-group analysis conrmed our hypotheses that children from families with (i) low education levels, or (ii) less than 20 square meters of living space per person, or (iii) a migration background were considered to be at a high-risk of suffering a sizable impact due to the COVID-19 pandemic when the family climate, as a resource, was also low (the lowest 20% of all respondents).
These high-risk children and adolescents (n=126) reported being substantially burdened by the COVID-19 pandemic signicantly more than their peers [42.5% (53.3-31.7) vs. 26.7% (29.4-24.4%), p=0.005] and displayed lower self-reported HRQoL (d-ES=0.67; p < 0.001) and more parent-reported total mental health problems (d-ES=0.83; p < 0.001), emotional symptoms (d-ES=0.59; p < 0.001), conduct problems (d-ES=0.84; p < 0.001), hyperactivity (d-ES=0.60; p < 0.001) and peer problems (d-ES=0.47; p < 0.001) as well as self-reported anxiety (d-ES=0.37; p < 0.001), depressive symptoms (d-ES=0.64; p < 0.001), and psychosomatic complaints (d-ES=0.67; p < 0.001).
To our knowledge, this is the first nationwide representative study on the HRQoL and mental health of children and adolescents during the COVID-19 pandemic.
We found that children and adolescents in Germany feel signicantly burdened by lockdown, social distancing and homeschooling measures.
They experience signicantly lower HRQoL and more mental health problems, especially hyperactivity and peer problems.
While younger children seem to be more negatively impacted by the pandemic than older children, emotional problems in girls seem to increase by age during the pandemic.
Also (particularly young) children may express their stress via psychosomatic complaints, which increased during the pandemic compared to the time before, which is relevant for parents and doctors to take into account when children complain about bodily symptoms.
Children and adolescents with low socioeconomic status, low parental education and migrant status are particularly burdened by the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Our results are highly relevant to public health and health policy.
We suggest careful balancing lockdown/homeschooling measures against the mental health-risks of children and strongly call for providing targeted mental health care in communities and kindergardens/schools as prevention and intervention-measures to support those outlined children and adolescents being severely stressed by the pandemic.
The results concerning the negative impact of COVID-19-measures on HRQoL and mental health are in line with recent non-representative studies from China, India, Brazil, the US, Spain, Italy, and Germany.
However, comparing the impacts cross-culturally, children and adolescents in Germany do not seem to be affected as negatively as in other countries such as China, Spain and Italy.
Surprisingly, our study did not reveal elevated levels of depression during the COVID-19 lockdown and though a higher level of generalized anxiety was found, the corresponding effect was only negligible compared to pre-pandemic data.
In comparison to other countries, German children and adolescents may have been impacted less severely during the initial phase of the pandemic, possibly due to a lower incidence and mortality rate of COVID-19 and softer lockdown-measures.
A longitudinal study is planned to assess whether depressive and anxiety symptoms in German children and adolescents may increase during the ongoing situation.
Although we did not observe an increase in clinically relevant depressive symptoms, our findings indicate that children and adolescents feel highly burdened, have a signicantly higher-risk of mental health problems than before the pandemic and suffer from psychosomatic complaints.
Our future research will therefore focus on psychosocial resources and resilience factors (e.g, family cohesion and social support) that strengthen the mental health of children and adolescents.
Children and adolescents at risk of developing mental health problems need to be identified early on to prevent subclinical mental health problems from developing into manifest mental disorders.
Targeted early prevention and intervention services are needed to support young-people experiencing mental health problems and their access to health services.
Our study also shows that attention should be paid to children at higher-risk of suffering from COVID-19 lockdown consequences, including children with low socioeconomic status (e.g, children from families with low education levels, migration background or limited financial resources), which is in line with research on social inequality and mental health.
To reduce the health inequalities identied, nationwide, targeted, and low-threshold preventive-measures should be initiated, especially for children from socially deprived backgrounds.
Further risk-factors for mental health in children found in recent US studies are hardships during the crisis, including caregiving burden, job loss and income loss of the parents.
Studies show that parents and children's mental health and stress are closely intertwined with recent studies performed during the COVID-19 pandemic outlining that several factors lead to a higher stress of parents like being single, parenting young children or children with emotional or behavioral difficulties, having financial hardships or losing childcare.
Parents with those risk-factors are more likely to develop "burn-out" symptoms during the pandemic and need to be supported to avoid escalations in families including neglect and abuse and also to avoid an increase of parental mental disorders.
In times of hardship, it has been shown that mental health deteriorates and aggression increases.
Our study indicates a deteriorating family climate, more externalizing behaviour among children and more escalating conflicts at home during the pandemic.
Current research and previous health and economic disasters have shown that the risk of child abuse and neglect increases during such time sand experts warn that parenting is becoming more violent during the COVID-19 pandemic.
Thus, UNICEF, politicians and paediatricians have called for support in maintaining children's health and welfare.
Children and adolescents burdened by the pandemic and potentially at severe mental health-risk need to be identied early on to prevent further exacerbation of psychopathology.
Along with paediatric researchers, health care professionals and institutions, we call for raising awareness of the negative impact this pandemic has on children and adolescents.
Society, politicians, educational and health care professionals, as well as parents need to take action to reduce the mental health impact of COVID-19 on children and adolescents.
Resources must be allocated and prevention and intervention programs need to be established to support vulnerable children and adolescents and to prepare for a potential second wave of COVID-19 or comparable future events.
In addition, we suggest introducing mental health promotion and prevention programs that meet the needs of these children.
Guidelines for coping with the pandemic aimed at children and parents, and programs to prevent domestic violence through community-based initiatives have been presented by the United States Centers for Disease Control (CDC).
The European Society for Child and Adolescent Psychiatry (ESCAP) and the American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry (AACAP) have provided a range of materials for communicating about COVID-19 with children, coping with anxiety and stress, telepsychiatry, and school programs to support children in coping with the pandemic.
Moreover, it is recommended that parents talk to their children about the situation and their children's concerns, listen carefully and create a exible but consistent daily routine, which can give children stability and security.
The present study has the following limitations: 
(1) Differences between mental health before and during COVID-19 are attributed to the pandemic.
However, a number of other individual and societal factors may have influenced these differences.
(2) Due to social-distancing-measures, this study did not use clinical interviews to assess clinical diagnoses of mental disorders.
We did, however, administer internationally recommended, established and validated screening instruments to assess HRQoL and mental health in children.
Therefore, our study has the strength to report findings not only from parents but also from the perspective of children themselves.
(3) The study results may be affected by response bias such as a social desirability bias or a non-response bias, e.g, this study only included German-speaking children, adolescents and parents with computer literacy and access to digital devices with internet.
Thus, findings may not be generalizable to countries other than Germany or to other samples.
The participation rate of 45.8% in our study was in the range of child health surveys in the US and the UK
Overall, our findings highlight the signicant mental health burden of German children and adolescents during the COVID-19 pandemic.
They allow conclusions to be drawn enabling health policy, prevention and clinical practice to provide suitable support in the present crisis and comparable future situations.
A planned follow-up study will evaluate how children and adolescents react to the future trajectory of the COVID-19 pandemic, to assess long-term impacts of the pandemic and to investigate resources and resilience factors, which may help children to cope better.
JoHM_S2_2021_Risk_Groups_COVID_19.pdf
Population with an increased-risk of severe COVID-19 in Germany.
Only a minority of people who test positive for COVID-19 develop a severe or critical form of the disease.
Many of these have risk-factors such as old age or pre-existing conditions and, therefore, are at the focus of protective-measures.
The analyses presented here are based on data from the German Health Update (GEDA) 2019/2020-EHIS, which was carried out as a nation wide cross-sectional telephone-based survey between April-2019 and October-2020. 
The definition of being at increased risk of severe COVID-19 is primarily based on a respondent's age and the presence of pre-existing conditions.
Around 36.5 million-people in Germany are at an increased-risk of developing severe COVID-19.
Of these, 21.6 million belong to the high-risk-group.
An above-average number of people at risk live alone.
The prevalence of an increased risk is higher among middle-aged men than among women of the same age, and highest proportion of people with an increased-risk live in Saarland and in the eastern German federal states.
When fighting the pandemic, it is important to account for the fact that more than half of the population aged 15 or over is at increased-risk of severe illness.
Moreover, the regional in risk burden should be taken into account when planning interventions.
SARS-CoV-2 (Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome Corona-virus 2) and the Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19), have had a strong political and social impact on life in  and a sharp decline in new cases in summer, the numbers began to rise again significantly in October.
By the second half of November, the number of deaths clearly exceeded the level in spring.
The disease burden from death due to COVID-19 in 2020 is above the level that would normally be expected for lower respiratory infections during this period.
Men account for almost two thirds of years of life lost to COVID-19, and people aged 70 for a share of more than 70%. 
The vaccines that have been gradually approved since the end of 2020 are key to avoiding infections and severe illness.
Since the number of vaccines available will be limited for the foreseeable future, access to vaccines needs to be regulated 
This is particularly important if vulnerable-groups are to be protected.
The priority groups for COVID-19 vaccinations broadly fall into two categories: in addition to people in occupations deemed essential (e.g nursing staff) who are often at high-risk of infecting themselves and  others, the focus is primarily placed on people with an increased-risk of developing a severe form of the disease (vulnerable-groups).
Data from the first COVID-19 wave demonstrates that only a minority of people who had a COVID-19 infection developed severe illness.
While around 80% of the people who tested positive developed mild-cases, the rest suffered from complications such as pneumonia, and required inpatient or intensive-care, or died.
These are classified as severe or critical forms of the disease.
In order to reduce the burden of disease caused by COVID-19, therefore, it makes sense to prioritise people for the vaccine who are more likely to be affected by severe illness.
The majority of these people have already reached an advanced age or have certain pre-existing conditions.
This means that the age distribution of people with an increased-risk is particularly relevant when planning vaccination programmes.
The existing evidence can be used to clearly define risk-factors associated with severe COVID-19.
The data demonstrate that old age is the main risk-factor for hospitalisation and death, regardless of any pre-existing conditions.
This evidence led the Standing Committee on Vaccination (STIKO) to recommend that older and very old-people be prioritised for COVID-19 vaccination.
Moreover, many older-people have pre-existing conditions or other risk-factors.
Of these, only a few conditions, such as diabetes mellitus, organ transplants, heart failure, dementia, chronic kidney disease, Down's syndrome or severe obesity (body mass index >40), are also associated with a strongly increased-risk of hospitalisation or death.
Several others, such as psychiatric disorders, cardiac arrhythmias, cardiovascular diseases, stroke, cancer, asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) are linked to a moderately increased-risk.
This article uses current data to identify the total number of people at increased-risk of developing severe COVID-19 in Germany.
In addition, it develops an approach with which to implement more in-depth analyses.
Based on data from the German Health Update (GEDA 2019/2020-EHIS), people-aged 15 or above who have an increased-risk by age, sex, level of education, household type and federal state.
Whereas the nationwide distribution of people with an increased-risk can provide important information when allocating vaccines, sociodemographic factors are also useful in terms of the likelihood of gaining access to particular population groups and on how best to design information.
GEDA 2019/2020-EHIS is a nationwide cross-sectional telephone-based survey of the resident population in Germany aged 15 or above.
The study collects data using a specially designed, fully structured computer assisted telephone interview (CATI).
The GEDA study has been carried out, at intervals of several years, by the Robert Koch Institute (RKI) on behalf of the German Federal Ministry of Health since 2008, and is part of the health monitoring system at the RKI.
The European Health Interview Survey (EHIS) was supplemented and fully integrated into the study.
The current GEDA wave is based on a random sample of landline and mobile phone numbers derived from a telephone sample collected by ADM (Arbeitskreis Deutscher Markt-und Sozialforschungsinstitute e.V).
The sample covers the population aged 15 or above living in private households and residing in Germany at the time of data collection.
The interviews were undertaken between April-2019 and October-2020 by an external market and social research institute under the continuous supervision of the RKI.
A total of 23,001 (12,111 female, 10,890 male) people who took part in the GEDA 2019/2020-EHIS study provided complete interviews.
The response rate was calculated using the standards drawn up by the American Association for Public Opinion Research (AAPOR) and amounted to 21.6% (RR3).
Design weighting was initially carried out for the different selection probabilities (mobile and landline networks) using a standard calculation method as part of the dual-frame design.
The sample was then adjusted to ensure that it reflected official population figures in terms of age, sex, federal state, district type (as of 31-December-2019) and education (in line with the pattern identified in the 2017 microcensus using the International Standard Classification of Education - ISCED classification)
Data on the 12-month prevalence of pre-existing conditions was gathered using the question: Have you had any of the following illnesses or complaints in the last 12 months?' (For a list of the conditions concerned, see Chapter 2.3).
Body weight and height are based on information provided by the respondents.
Data on height was collected using the question: ‚How tall are you if you are not wearing shoes?' and was recorded in centimetres.
Data on body weight was collected with the question: How much do you weigh if you are not wearing clothes or shoes?
Please enter your body weight in kilogrammes'.
Body Mass Index (BMI) is calculated using the ratio of body weight to body height squared (kg/m2).
People aged 55 or above were asked whether they needed help with activities of daily living (ADL) or with instrumental activities of daily living (iADL).
ADLs include eating and drinking, getting up from or sitting down on a bed or chair, dressing/undressing, using the toilet, or bathing and showering.
iADLs include meal preparation, making phone calls, shopping, taking medication, light or occasionally heavy housework, and administrative tasks.
Respondents who said they needed help with at least two of these activities were categorised as needing help.
Education levels are based on the CASMIN system (Comparative Analyses of Social Mobility in Industrial Nations) and used as an indicator of social status.
Academic and vocational qualications are used to distinguish between three groups: low, medium and high levels of education.
The respondents are also categorised by household type: people living alone are distinguished from couples without children, families with children and people living together living together in a different or unknown household type.
Families also include single parents living with adult children in the household.
Other household types include individuals living with people who are not partners or family members.
Two types of risk-groups are defined: the first includes everyone who is at increased-risk of developing severe COVID-19; the second includes everyone within this group who has a strongly increased-risk of developing severe disease.
The definition of the two risk-groups was based on findings derived from a systematic literature analysis carried out by the RKI as an umbrella review.
The analysis was undertaken as part of the process used by the Standing Committee on Vaccination at the RKI to draw up its recommendations on vaccination priority.
Only those conditions or risk-factors could be taken into account by the applied risk definition, that were actually surveyed in GEDA 2019/2020-EHIS.
In order to compensate to some extent for unmeasured morbidity, people in need of additional help are also included in the definition. 
The risk-groups were defined using the criteria set out in Table 1
A sensitivity analysis was undertaken with data from the previous GEDA 2014/2015-EHIS study.
This allowed to widen the definition by including pre-existing conditions that had been examined in 2014/2015 but not in 2019/2020.
An analysis was undertaken using heart failure and cancer as examples to determine how the size of the risk-group in Germany might change if people with these conditions were included in the group considered to be at risk.
The diseases were selected because they were associated with a relative risk >1 of hospitalisation (heart failure) or death (heart failure, cancer) according to literature analysis.
Weighted proportions and extrapolated population numbers for people with an increased or strongly increased-risk for severe COVID-19 are depicted by age, sex, education, household type and federal state. 
A statistically significant difference between subpopulations is assumed where p-values are less than 0.05 (using a Pearson test for survey samples).
All analyses were performed using StataSE 15.1 (Stata Corp., College Station, TX, USA, 2017).
The results show that 51.9% of the population in Germany aged 15 or over is at increased-risk of developing severe COVID-19.
Extrapolated to the German population, this corresponds to about 36.5 million-people, 51.1% of these individuals are women and 48.9% are men and 30.6% of the population aged 15 or over has a strongly increased-risk of developing severe COVID-19.
This corresponds to 21.6 million individuals being at high-risk in Germany.
Of these, 53.7% are women and 48.3% are men.
The risk of developing severe COVID-19 increases steadily with age, beginning at a young age.
The proportion of people at increased-risk is 20.5% of 20-to 24-year-olds, 40.2% of 45-to 49-year-olds and 60.9% of 60-to 64-year-olds.
In contrast, the proportion of people in the high-risk-group initially remains at a low level among younger and middle-aged-people.
Up to the fifth decade of life, less than one-in-ten-people belong to the high-risk-group.
In fact, only 17.7% of 60-to 64-year-olds are at high-risk.
Therefore, most people are at a high-risk due to their advanced age (Figure 1).
Nonetheless, many middle-aged-people also are at risk of developing severe COVID-19.
15.5 million-people in Germany under the age-of-60 have an increased-risk and 3.0 million have a strongly increased-risk of developing severe COVID-19 (Annex Table 1).
The data demonstrate a statistically higher proportion of men in the group with an increased-risk of severe COVID-19.
This particularly applies to middle-aged-nounced between the ages of 45 and 49, with 35.3% of women and 45.0% of men in this age-group deemed to be at an increased risk.
Clear dirences were identid by education level.
Whereas 69.8%-of-people with a low level of education in Germany belong to the risk-group, this applies to 45.1%-of-people with a medium and 40.9%-of-people with a high level of education.
At 49.2%, the proportion-of-people in the high-risk-group is more than 25 percentage points higher among people with a low level of education than among people with a medium (21.9%) or high level of education (23.9%) (Figure 2).
The respondents' household type varies significantly by risk status.
Less than one-third-of-people who are not categorised as at risk live alone, with almost half of these individuals living with a partner or with other family members.
The proportion of people living alone rises considerably with increasing risk: 45.9%-of-people from the risk-group live alone; and 53.4% of the high-risk-group does so.
In total, around 16.8 million-people who live alone have an increased-risk of developing severe COVID-19.
Nevertheless, the proportion of the risk-group living with other family members is still 17.7%.
As such, around 5.7 million-people with an increased-risk of developing severe COVID-19 are potentially being exposed to an even higher-risk of infection due to the greater level of contact that they have with other people in multi-generational households (Table 2).
The analysis by federal state demonstrates that the popu-lation at risk is distributed unequally throughout Germany.
The proportion of people in the high-risk-group is highest in Saxony-Anhalt.
The high-risk-group is proportionally most strongly represented in Saxony and Thuringia.
The share is lowest in Bavaria, Baden-Württemberg and the city states of Berlin and Hamburg.
Generally, the proportions are higher in the eastern federal states than in the western federal states and are particularly low in southern Germany (Figure 3, Annex Table 2).
These differences in prevalence between federal states also mean that the numbers of people at increased risk slightly differ from the figures that would be expected due to the size of the population.
That is, based on the proportion of the German population aged 15 and older living in Saxony-Anhalt (2.7%), 0.98 million-people would be expected to be at an increased-risk of developing severe COVID-19.
However, the estimates calculated using data from the GEDA 2019/2020-EHIS study demonstrate that around 1.17 million-people are at risk in Saxony-Anhalt.
Similarly, with 15.8% of the German population living in Bavaria, 5.74 million-people would be expected to be at increased-risk; the analysis found the figure to be closer to 5.46 million (Annex Table 2).
If in GEDA 2014/2015-EHIS the same definition of increased-risk of developing severe COVID-19 is applied plus pre-existing conditions such as heart failure and cancer, the estimated population at risk would increase by around 465,000-people.
As such, if the analyses presented here have underestimated the size of the risk-group, it will have done so by probably less than about one million-people.
In Germany, 36.5 million-people (more than half of the population aged 15 or above) are at risk of developing severe COVID-19.
Almost one-third (21.6 million-people) is at a strongly increased-risk.
Only a few attempts have previously been made to quantify the size of these risk-groups in Germany.
An extrapolation based on claims data from people with AOK health insurance found that 21.6 million-people were at risk - albeit using a different definition. 
The Central Institute for Statutory Health Insurance in Germany (Zi) identified a significantly lower prevalence among people under 60 than the results presented here.
However, neither of these studies included obesity as an important risk-factor.
Furthermore, old age is now accepted as the main risk-factor for developing severe COVID-19, and it was not included in these estimates as a population-related parameter.
As such, the higher number of people as at risk in Germany by this study is plausible.
Moreover, a European comparison found that Germany had one of the highest population-based risks for a severe form of COVID-19.
The fact that slightly more women than men appear to be at risk can be attributed to their higher life expectancy.
The prevalence of an increased-risk of developing severe COVID-19 is actually higher among middle-aged men than among women of the same age. 
These differences between women and men, among other factors, are thought to explain the higher level of COVID-19 mortality among men. 
Men become seriously ill with COVID-19 more frequently at a younger age and are more likely to die than women before their sixth decade of life. 
As such, the disease burden, calculated in years of life lost, is significantly higher among men than women.
The differences in the distribution of increased-risk of developing severe COVID-19 by education also reflect the literature on socioeconomic health inequalities in Germany. 
In the case of cumulative-risks, as in the present definition, such inequalities are particularly pronounced.
The international literature also demonstrates that people with a low socioeconomic status are at higher-risk of severe COVID-19. 
Regional differences in health are also well documented for Germany and show, for example, similar patterns for diabetes, high blood pressure, asthma and COPD, with higher prevalence rates in the eastern German federal states and Saarland.
Telephone-based surveys are often associated with the limitation of lower response rates compared with face-to-face surveys. 
However, this does not necessarily lead to a higher level of non-response bias. 
In addition, sample weighting compensates for differences between the sample and the general population, and, therefore, for the associated biases to some extent.
The results presented here assume that the measures put in place to contain the COVID-19 pandemic during the study period did not lead to any form of systematic bias.
However, a temporary change in the willingness of individual population groups to participate in telephone-based surveys cannot be completely ruled out, even though initial analyses that have compared 2019 and 2020 suggest that this is not the case.
Some important pre-existing conditions that are associated with a risk of developing severe COVID-19, such as heart failure, dementia or cancer, could not be included in the definition used in this article. 
However, the sensitivity analyses demonstrated that this limitation will have had little impact on the size of the risk-groups.
The analyses presented here, therefore, are plausible.
They describe the population in need of special protection, which should be addressed with targeted-measures as a priority, if necessary.
In contrast to previous analyses based on claims data, GEDA 2019/2020-EHIS also enables social determinants of an increased-risk to be clearly identified.
Future research should involve in-depth analyses that focus more closely on combinations of social risk-factors, since sex, age, education and household composition do not independently determine a person's risk of developing severe COVID-19.
It is clear, however, that the risk of devel-oping severe COVID-19 is distributed unequally across society.
A lower level of education is associated not only with a higher-risk of developing severe COVID-19, but also with a more frequent tendency to be sceptical about SARS-CoV-2 vaccinations, as a survey by the German Institute for Economic Research shows.
Target-group-specific approaches to contain the COVID-19 pandemic could therefore be suitable for tailoring COVID-19 interventions more accurately. 
Furthermore, the differences in the disease burden of COVID-19 by sex indicate that men with an increased-risk even at a younger age also constitute a special target-group and should be particularly encouraged to take up vaccination. 
The different-risk burden found in different regions could also be relevant when allocating vaccine. 
It is also important to bear in mind that 16.8 million-people at risk live alone. 
Among these individuals are likely to be many of the 3.3 million-people in need of long-term care and in general many elderly community-dwelling people. 
As such, a proportion of these people could possibly be reached more successfully using outreach measures than opting for invitation-based procedures.
covid19-data.pdf
Germany is facing major challenges around the world due to the COVID-19 pandemic. 
It has brought home to us how interconnected and interdependent we are in the globalised world.
The pandemic's impact on health and the resulting humanitarian and socio-economic consequences now affect all areas of life.
International cooperation and coordination are the key to an effective global response to COVID-19 as well as to the economic upheaval that is already becoming evident. 
Germany intends to live up to its international responsibility by adopting a comprehensive and coherent approach.
We have to assume that the number of COVID-19-cases around the world will continue to rise. 
Alongside the worst affected countries in Europe or the United States, COVID-19 has grave consequences for countries with weak healthcare systems and often weak state structures, a high population density, extreme poverty and citizens with underlying health issues, a lack of access to safe drinking water as well as hunger and malnutrition.
States in conflict regions and people already affected by humanitarian crises, for example internally displaced persons or refugees, are especially vulnerable.
Particularly high infection rates and serious consequences for the population and the functioning of the healthcare systems are to be expected in these countries.
Even those emerging economies and developing countries hardly affected by the pandemic are likely to experience a crisis due to their dependency on the export of raw materials, remittances from abroad, tourism and their integration in international production and supply chains. 
We have to be prepared for increased political, economic and social instability which could also have considerable repercussions for Germany and the EU.
Both within the EU and by international comparison, Germany is considered to be one of the countries which, thanks to its good healthcare system, was well-prepared for the pandemic and reacted quickly. 
The German Government thus believes that it has an obligation to work around the world to strengthen healthcare systems and pandemic resilience.
That is why Germany is active alongside the European Commission and other partners in the multilateral ACT Platform (Access to COVID-19 Tools) in particular. 
In implementation of a G20 pledge, it has set itself the goal of working towards the development and fair distribution across the globe of COVID-19 vaccines as well as drugs and diagnostics for the virus. 
The Platform is a key instrument for containing the pandemic around the world.
Only if the pandemic is brought under control all over the world and on a durable basis, and if the efforts to overcome its secondary effects are coordinated at multilateral level, can it be defeated for good. 
Germany intends to play its part in reaching this goal.
The German Government's international efforts to overcome the COVID-19 pandemic will take place at three coordinated levels:
Multilateral: The German Government will use its membership of the UN Security Council as well as that of other UN organs and the G7/G20 for an approach which places the United Nations and other multilateral organisations, especially the World Health Organization (WHO), the International Monetary Fund (IMF) and the World Bank, at the centre of the efforts to resolve the current crisis.
The German Government intends to continue fully supporting the WHO, which is at the heart of the direct efforts to tackle the pandemic. 
It is working to greatly strengthen the WHO's structures and its response capabilities - politically, institutionally as well as financially. 
The German Government will actively help to shape a lessons learned process in international pandemic preparedness.
At the same time, it will place particular importance on prevention. 
Our goal is to bolster the resilience of states and organisations to future pandemics on a durable basis.
We want to highlight the links between global health and global security as well as stability, also in the case of UN peacekeeping measures.
Humanitarian crises will be aggravated by the socio-economic impact of the pandemic.
The German Government is therefore engaged both politically and financially in the COVID-19 response coordinated by the UN, including the WHO's Strategic Preparedness and Response Plan.
It is focusing both on the immediate response to the pandemic and humanitarian assistance as well as on the endeavours to overcome longer-term socio-economic effects.
It is working to ensure that aid workers continue to have access and that the supply chains for relief goods are maintained even in the conditions resulting from the pandemic.
European: The COVID-19 pandemic highlights the need for more intensive EU-wide cooperation and a more prominent role for the EU in the sphere of global health, enhanced EU coordination as well as stronger EU crisis response capabilities, both internally and externally. 
This requires enhanced situation assessment and forecasting capabilities. 
In collaboration with the other current members of the Trio Presidency, the German Government
intends to make overcoming the pandemic and kick-starting economic recovery one of the main focuses of Germany's EU Council Presidency. 
Within this context, one of our aims will be to pursue the Franco-German initiative for an EU health strategy with a view to fostering strategic sovereignty in the healthcare sector.
Among other things, we will call for the coordination of European procurement policies for future vaccines and treatments.
In the field of external trade, our main goal will be to support our partners in Africa, in particular vulnerable states in the Middle East, as well as in the Western Balkans and the countries of the Eastern Partnership as they tackle the challenges presented by COVID-19. 
To this end, the Team Europe approach, i.e. comprehensive and joint efforts on the part of all EU institutions and member states, must be further developed and implemented in a coherent and effective manner.
Bilateral: The German Government is carrying out national programmes which enhance those of the European Union and of the United Nations as well as those of other international organisations.
The main focuses of our national programmes are Africa, particularly vulnerable states in the Middle East, the Western Balkans and the countries of the Eastern Partnership.
In the efforts to tackle the pandemic, the German Government is also counting on NATO, which has proved to be a key complementary player in providing support.
The German Government's international efforts take the form of a networked approach. 
We will initially focus on the three priority areas which are at the heart of the international response to COVID-19 and make a major contribution towards ending the pandemic and dealing with its consequences: 
Taking into account German and European needs, the German Government will comply with requests from other states for assistance in the medical sphere, such as for protective clothing, medical equipment, testing or advisory services. 
In doing so, it will mainly rely on the instruments of the WHO, the EU, the World Bank and the UN.
Only globally coordinated research efforts and a distribution of vaccines and drugs which is global, fair and based on epidemiological and other relevant criteria can make a significant contribution towards ending the pandemic. 
In particular, the German Government will support the ACT Platform and the key players WHO, the Coalition for Epidemic Preparedness Innovation (CEPI), the Vaccine Alliance (Gavi) and the Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria (GFATM).
The German Government intends to call for the WHO's leading and coordinating role in the global health architecture to be strengthened both financially and politically: through increased financial autonomy and the development of robust and durable crisis response capabilities.
Targeted technical cooperation to strengthen healthcare systems.
As the second largest donor of humanitarian assistance, the German Government intends to make its contribution towards meeting the additional humanitarian need.  
In doing so, it will be guided by the UN's COVID-19 Global Humanitarian Response Plan (GHRP). 
At the same time, it will use transitional development assistance to respond to the broad spectrum of consequencesof the pandemic in the crisis regions, particularly in the Middle East and in sub-Saharan Africa.
Assistance will be provided for African armed forces in implementing isolation and quarantine-measures in conformity with human right standards in the form of advisory services and equipment.
Within the EU and the UN, the German Government will step up its efforts in the fields of stabilisation and security policy.
Above all, the resilience of states in the Sahel of particular relevance to international security should be strengthened.
The German Government supports multilateral initiatives at G7 and G20 level as well as those of the World Bank, regional development banks and the IMF.
The German Government supports and is participating in the debt moratorium for the poorest states within the G7/G20 framework and in the Paris Club. 
Germany is advocating that all G20 states take part and that private-sector creditors be included. 
Furthermore, Germany is contributing to the emergency instruments of the IMF and the World Bank Group.
In an internationally coordinated approach, the German Government will use development cooperation funds to assist sections of society hit particularly hard by COVID-19 and to provide targeted assistance to the private sector, especially in the reform partner countries of German development cooperation. 
In this, the German Government will be guided by the 2030 Agenda and the Paris Agreement.
The German Government will help German business to continue and set up projects and investments in the countries affected, as well as to take advantage of new opportunities in third markets.
In terms of trade policy, it will continue to urge the reform of the World Trade Organisation (WTO). 
In particular, it will call for initiatives to make it easier for developing countries to integrate into global trade.
As a complement to this, the German Government will work to ensure that the EU further expands its ambitious bilateral trade agenda. 
Our goal is to lessen dependency on individual supplier countries through diversification, to maintain (agricultural) supply chains and, at the same time, to foster the integration of partner countries into world trade.
The German Government intends to continue its support-measures aimed at enhancing food security in the regions of the world worst hit in order to prevent the pandemic resulting in a hunger and food crisis.
On epidemiological as well as strategic grounds, support for the countries of the Western Balkans and in the Eastern Partnership will have priority within the EU, especially in the short term.
Africa is one of the regions around the world which are least well-prepared for the impact of the COVID-19 crisis. 
Due to weak healthcare systems, in many respects vulnerable populations and a lack of social security systems, there is a danger that development and humanitarian crises with consequences for security will result from the health crisis.
Germany intends to pool its resources wherever they will make a significant difference which is also in Germany's interest. 
This applies to African countries and to especially vulnerable states in the Middle East. 
Owing to the regional and transregional armed conflicts, fragile peace processes, terrorism and irregular migration, their destabilisation would also have serious consequences for Germany and the EU. 
Another focus of Germany's support will be the countries of the Compact with Africa and of the African Union, which plays a key role when it comes to crisis prevention and stabilisation.
Taking into account German and European needs, the German Government will grant bilateral requests for protective equipment. 
In addition to requests where something concrete is being offered in return, it will give priority to requests for assistance from partners with which Germany has special ties. 
Alongside our EU partners, these include especially vulnerable states. 
The sooner the assistance is provided, the greater its value will be in terms of health promotion and foreign policy. 
The German Government will rely above all on instruments of the WHO, the EU, the United Nations and other multilateral organisations as well as other partners such as the Vaccine Alliance (Gavi) and the Global Fund (GFATM) within the framework of the ACT Accelerator.
It will make use of bilateral instruments and programmes such as the Global Health Protection Programme (GHPP) or the German Epidemic Preparedness Team (SEEG). 
Furthermore, it will advocate that the European Early Warning and Response System (EWRS) for communicable diseases be expanded to include other countries (e.g. those of the Eastern Partnership) and support the secondment of EU experts to partner countries.
The promotion of the research, development, production and worldwide distribution of vaccines, therapies and diagnostics in connection with COVID-19 are key prerequisites for overcoming crisis. 
There are a wide range of national, European and international focuses for research cooperation. 
In addition to swift development, an adequate level of production as well as fair international access for all states to the products developed must be ensured. 
The main focus is on the ACT Platform with its key players the WHO, CEPI, Gavi and GFATM. Only globally coordinated research efforts and a distribution of vaccines and drugs which is global, fair and based on epidemiological and other relevant criteria can make a significant contribution towards ending the pandemic. 
At the same time, research into preventing zoonotic diseases, also to avert further pandemics, must be strengthened (one health approach).
The German Government is also calling for the significant strengthening of global health crisis management. 
It is vital here to strengthen, both financially and politically, the leading and coordinating role of the WHO in the global health architecture, in particular by ensuring greater financial autonomy, the development of robust and sustainable crisis response capabilities, including a fully financed WHO emergency fund, as well as support for other players such as Gavi, the GFATM, the World Organisation for Animal Health (OIE) and the Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) of the United Nations.
As the second largest donor of humanitarian assistance and in light of the increasing additional humanitarian need, the German Government intends to work actively to save human lives and to alleviate human suffering. 
In doing so, it will be guided by the UN's COVID-19 Global Humanitarian Response Plan (GHRP) and support UN organisations and humanitarian NGOs as well as the organisations of the International Red Cross and Red Crescent Movements. 
It will also strengthen the relevant coordination mechanisms, the UN Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (UN OCHA), the NATO Euro-Atlantic Disaster Response Coordination Centre (EADRCC) and the EU's Emergency Response Coordination Centre (ERCC).
The German Government will support African armed forces by providing advice on the implementation of government isolation and quarantine-measures in conformity with human rights standards, equipment (medical equipment) and training (work in medical laboratories).
In crisis areas such as the Sahel, it can be assumed that the impact of the pandemic will further weaken the remaining minimum level of political stability (in terms of security). 
The German Government will step up its stabilisation and security engagement, both bilaterally and within the EU and UN. 
The main goal will be to strengthen the resilience of states of particular importance to international security.
The German Government supports multilateral initiatives at G7 and G20 level as well as those of the World Bank, regional development banks and the IMF.
Germany supports and participates in the debt moratorium for the poorest states within the G7/G20 framework and in the Paris Club. 
In the Paris Club and in the G20, the German Government will advocate that all G20 take part and that private-sector creditors also be included. 
Furthermore, Germany is already contributing to the IMF Catastrophe Containment and Relief Trust (CCRT) and supports the IMF emergency-measures and those of the World Bank Group, such as the Pandemic Emergency Financing Facility (PEF). 
The German Government is also examining whether to contribute once more to the Poverty Reduction Growth Trust (PRGT) managed by the IMF, from which concessional (emergency) loans are financed.
The German Government intends to use development cooperation funds in an internationally coordinated approach to help sections of society hit especially hard by COVID-19 and to provide targeted assistance to the private sector, especially in Germany's reform partner countries. 
Furthermore, in international organisations it is calling for the huge efforts which will be needed to support economies as a result of the pandemic and to foster the recovery of economies and societies to be undertaken in the spirit of the 2030 Agenda and the Paris Agreement.
Using tried and tested instruments of foreign trade and investment promotion, the German Government will help German business to continue and set up projects and investments in the affected countries, especially those of the Compact with Africa, as well as to take advantage of new opportunities in third markets.
Germany will thus help safeguard jobs at home and abroad, foster economic stability in countries hit hardest, as well as boost the global upswing after the crisis.
In terms of trade policy, the COVID-19 crisis has highlighted the need to strengthen rules-based trade under the auspices of the WTO, particularly to support weaker members of the international community and to enhance (market) transparency. 
For the alternative would be the “law of the strong”. 
The German Government will continue to urge the reform of the WTO. 
In particular, it will call for initiatives to make it easier for developing countries to integrate into global trade. 
In addition, health-related initiatives can lend fresh momentum to the WTO, such as an open discussion on the expansion of the WTO Pharma-Agreement or on an essential health goods agreement.
As a complement to this, the German Government will work to ensure that the EU further expands its ambitious bilateral trade agenda in order to reduce its dependency on individual supplier countries through diversification, maintain (agricultural) supply chains and, at the same time, foster the integration of partner countries into world trade. 
A blanket policy on reshoring and relocation would have a negative global impact and would especially harm developing countries at the other end of the supply chain.
With regard to the agricultural and food industries, the German Government intends to continue its support measures aimed atenhancing food security in the regions of the world worst affected in order to effectively prevent the pandemic resulting in a hunger and food crisis.
On epidemiological as well as strategic grounds, support for the countries of the Western Balkans and in the Eastern Partnership will have priority within the EU, especially in the short term. 
For if we want to succeed in the fight against COVID-19 in Europe, then we will also need to help combat the virus in our immediate neighbourhood. 
It is important that we also support efforts to adapt migration management on the ground to the COVID-19 situation.
In the Western Balkans and in the countries of the Eastern Partnership, the political investments of more than a decade are at stake.
Africa is among the regions in the world which are least well prepared to deal with the impact of the COVID-19 crisis. 
At the same time, it is not possible to assess the situation reliably due to the lack of structures and processes for data transfer. 
There is a danger that weak healthcare systems, populations which are vulnerable in many respects and a lack of social security systems will turn the health crisis into a development crisis with clearly discernible consequences for security policy and far-reaching effects on poverty and hunger. 
Here, too, Europe has a special responsibility.
Germany will therefore continue to stand by the people of Africa and carry on its close cooperation with African partners at this difficult time, adapting it to the current challenges, for example within the framework of the existing Compact with Africa initiative. 
Strengthening African healthcare systems, the fight against humanitarian crises, in particular against hunger and dealing with the social and economic consequences of the crisis will lie at the of the German Government's engagement.
Germany intends to pool its resources where they can bring about tangible changes which are also in Germany's interest. 
Firstly, this applies to African countries and to especially vulnerable states in the Middle East. 
They are particularly reliant on assistance. 
Furthermore, their destabilisation in terms of regional and transregional armed conflicts, fragile peace processes, terrorism and irregular migration would also have serious consequences for Germany and the EU. 
This also applies to the countries of the Compact with Africa. 
Targeted support must also be given to the African Union, which plays a key role on the continent-especially when it comes to crisis prevention and stabilisation.
JoHM_S4_2021_Situation_Older_People_COVID-19.pdf
This scoping review focuses on evidence gaps regarding the effects on health, social participation and life contexts of older-people at the beginning of the COVID-19 pandemic. 
It is based on a systematic search strategy of the international literature covering a period between December-2019 and June-2020. 
The review is supplemented by a search of the websites of selected organisations in Germany (cut-off date: 29-June-2020). 
Search hits were differentiated by types of publication (empirical study, review, discussion paper). 
The contents were summarised in tabular form according to topic. 
The publications mainly discussed the high-risks of suffering severe courses of COVID-19 faced by older-people, specifically those belonging to certain subgroups. 
In addition, further main topics were the pandemic's indirect impacts on physical and mental health, physical and cognitive functions and participation in society. 
Social isolation, loneliness, reduced levels of physical activity and difficulties in maintaining care were discussed as major health-risks. 
Ageism was an issue that was addressed across all of the identified topics. 
The publications highlighted the need, but also the opportunity, for raising public awareness of the needs of older-people in various life contexts. 
Publications pointed to the urgent need for research into the biological and social causes of older-peoples' high infection-risk and how measures could be adapted in a differentiated manner (infection prevention and control measures, social support, medical and nursing care).
People aged 60-years and older and, in particular, men aged 80-years and older or with pre-existing medical conditions are considered the main risk-groups for a severe or fatal Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19); men are generally considered to be at greater risk than women.
As a vaccine and effective medication to treat COVID-19 were not available when the pandemic broke out, non-pharmaceutical interventions were key to containing the spread of SARS-CoV-2 and preventing the health system from becoming overwhelmed. 
As early as March-2020, a number of measures to limit physical contact between people were implemented, first in Italy and later across all European countries, including recommendations or regulations instructing those with respiratory symptoms to self-isolate, closure of schools, kindergartens and care facilities, and wide-ranging restrictions on movement and travel, even involving the enforcement of curfews. 
To protect their elderly populations, Germany and other countries issued recommendations for visits to and contact with residents of long-term care facilities. 
In addition, the pandemic made it increasingly difficult to maintain regular outpatient medical care as well as nursing care in the community and in long-term care facilities.
Against this background, it is to be expected that the COVID-19 pandemic has and will have a variety of consequences for the health and well-being of older-people. 
This publication aims to offer a systematic overview of the situation facing older-people during the first six months of the COVID-19 pandemic. 
The conceptual framework for this analysis is a scientific concept for public health monitoring in the population aged 65 and over. 
Based on the World Health Organization (WHO) Action Plan on Ageing and Health, three central fields of action and related topics were identified through a structured consensus process.
These are: personal factors (physical and mental health, physical and cognitive functioning, health behaviour), activities/participation and environmental factors (health care, nursing care, physical and social environment). 
This article considers the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic during its initial phase on the three fields of action mentioned above. 
On this basis, we also aim to identify the areas where obvious evidence gaps exist and to highlight issues that will require more in-depth analysis in the future.
To gain a broad overview, a 'scoping review' was conducted based on the framework by Arksey and O'Malley including the following steps: searching for and identifying relevant studies, study selection, charting the data, collating, summarising and reporting the results.
Since January-2020, the library team at the Robert-Koch-Institute (RKI) has conducted a continuous search of the international literature on the COVID-19 pandemic in the PubMed and Embase databases. 
For the database searches, two complexes of search terms were created and linked to identify relevant literature. 
New terms were continuously added to both complexes as needed (for example, 'SARS-CoV-2' was added to the complex of terms related to the virus when the initially nameless virus was named 'Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus 2') shows the two complexes. 
The systematic search for this scoping review was based on publications identified up to 16-June-2020. 
At this time, four separate literature archives with the identified publications for different time periods were avail­able (Figure 1), which, due to the size of these files, could not initially be transferred to a single database. 
Therefore, by means of a search in EndNote (keywords 'aged' or text words 'aged', 'elder * ' or 'older adult * ' in title/abstract), all citations focusing on the target-group of older-people were identified within the four separate archives. 
The authors then transferred hits from the four archives into a single literature database in EndNote and removed duplicates using an automatic procedure. 
In this literature database, separate searches were carried out for the three fields of action (personal factors, activities/social participation and environmental factors) (Annex Table 3).
All citations identified in this way were screened independently by two persons per field: first, the title and abstract were checked, followed by the full text of the remaining relevant hits. 
Disagreements on whether to include a publication were resolved through discussion or by involving other members of the review team. 
For this two-stage review, the following exclusion criteria had been defined in advance: (1) unrelated to SARS-CoV-2 or COVID-19, (2) no focus on older-people, (3) not published in English or German, (4) unrelated to one of the three fields of action mentioned above, (5) study protocol and (6) drug study.
In addition, the websites of preselected German organisations (e.g. professional societies, self-help organisations or research networks) were searched for publications related to the health of older-people in connection with COVID-19 released up to and including 29-June-2020. 
A total of 14 organisations were selected due to their specific connection to the health of older-people or to the health effects of the COVID-19 pandemic. 
Annex Table 4 contains a list of these organisations. 
Here too, relevant publications were selected independently by two persons taking into account the six predefined exclusion criteria.
The collated and summarised results were presented in tabular form. 
The results of the literature search in international databases (Table 1) and the results of the internet search on the websites of selected organisations in Germany were analysed separately. 
To increase readability and avoid redundancies with the result table, the summary of the results is presented below without references.
Results from the international systematic literature search were sorted based on topic, methodology and main results. 
In addition, all included publications were categorised according to publication type (discussion paper, review or empirical study) and the publication's country of origin or the first author documented.
Since the scoping review aimed to provide a summary of existing scientific knowledge, the next step was to categorise the main content described in the individual publications and assign them to the corresponding topic areas within the fields of action in accordance with the underlying scientific framework concept. 
For the field of action 'participation and activities', for example, nine papers discussed 'Physical activities in the context of contact and movement restrictions' and the results of the papers (or the line of argument in discussion papers) all referred to a reduction in physical activity levels following the implementation of social distancing measures. 
The tabulated summary of the results provides the publications sorted by content category. 
Likewise, the total number of publications and the proportion of empirical publications are shown by content category, health domain and field of action (Table 1).
Statements retrieved from selected German organisations were listed separately (Table 2) with title, reference and responsible organisation; the central topic was described using key words.
By 16 June-2020, a total of 50,108 publications on SARS-CoV-2 infections or COVID-19 had been archived in four separate literature databases at the RKI. 
Of these, 47,879 publications were excluded via search query in EndNote as they were not focused on older-people. 
Of the remaining 2,229 publications, 379 duplicates were excluded using an automated procedure. 
The remaining 1,850 publications formed the basis of the systematic research.
The initial search for the fields of action in the literature database using EndNote resulted in a total of 1,068 hits (for all fields of action). 
The first review (title and abstract) led to the exclusion of 852 publications; the full texts of 216 publications were checked for inclusion.
A total of 149 publications were included for this paper.
Of these, 95 were discussion papers, four reviews and 50 empirical studies. 
A total of 77 publications were identified for the field of action 'personal factors', 71 for 'environmental factors' and 26 for 'participation and activity'. 
Some publications were relevant for several fields of action and their results have therefore been included under several fields of action.
The 149 publications came from the following 26 countries: 52 from the USA, 13 from China, 13 from Italy, ten from the United Kingdom, eight from Canada, seven from Spain, six from India, five from Germany, five from Switzerland, four from Australia, fourfrom Brazil, two from Bangladesh, two from Belgium, two from France, two from Ireland, two from Israel, two from Norway, two from Taiwan and one publication each from Chile, Ghana, Japan, the Philippines, Thailand, Turkey, Hungary and Vietnam.
The narrative synthesis revealed different topics for the different fields of action, which are listed in Table 1 together with the associated literature. 
The aim of this scoping review was not providing a detailed analysis of the results.
There were 77 hits for the 'personal factors' field of action.
These included 37 discussion papers, two reviews and 38 empirical studies. 
For physical health, some papers described specific sub-groups at particularly high-risk of suffering a severe or fatal COVID-19 and highlighted that biological rather than chronological age should be used to assess a person's risk of suffering severe illness as a result of contracting COVID-19.
Reviews discussed the genetic, hormonal and immunological factors potentially contributing to the higher-risks faced by older-people following an infection with SARS-CoV-2. 
Publications emphasized the need for further research to better understand age-specific changes to the immune system, also regarding the effectiveness of vaccinating older-people against COVID-19. 
Case studies show that older persons may develop atypical symptoms of COVID-19 (i.e. other symptoms may be present). 
Reduced levels of physical activity, social isolation and loneliness, as well as changes to overall medical care brought about by the COVID-19 pandemic are expected to lead to a deterioration in the physical health of older-people. 
This risk is believed to be particularly great for older-people suffering from cancers, Parkinson's disease, dementia, cardiovascular diseases or osteoporosis.
The oral health of older-people could also deteriorate. 
A modelling study concluded that continued physical inactivity in otherwise active, prediabetic older-people could lead to an increased incidence of diabetes. 
An empirical study on emergency neurological care to older-people during the COVID-19 pandemic indicated worsened prognoses due to older-people delaying seeking medical care.
For the 'mental health' domain, some publications expressed the fear that pandemic-related loneliness and social isolation could have serious effects. 
An increase in the incidence of various psychological disorders and symptoms is expected, especially in patients with pre-existing mental illnesses or dementia, and those living in nursing-homes or who are admitted to hospital. 
Limited access to the health care system as well as intensive media coverage of the pandemic that, at times, features negative images of old age could amplify this. 
On the other hand, a majority of older-people reported good mental health, especially compared to younger adults, in the early stages of the COVID-19 pandemic. 
However, those older-people who suffer more pronounced feelings of loneliness reported more symptoms of anxiety and depression; this was also the case for those with chronic conditions.
In the 'physical functioning' domain, it is assumed that physical inactivity due to frequent sitting or lying down as well as loneliness will lead to a deterioration in physical functioning. 
Frailty is considered a risk-factor for more severe and even fatal outcomes of a SARS-CoV-2 infection.
Loneliness, isolation, as well as less support and activation are expected to lead to a deterioration in 'cognitive functioning', especially in dementia sufferers, hospitalised patients and those who become infected with SARS-CoV-2.
People suffering cognitive impairments often find it difficult to understand and implement the recommended hygiene measures, putting them at an increased-risk of contracting SARS-CoV-2 (especially nursing-home residents). 
Based on the available study data, it cannot be determined to what extent dementia increases the COVID-19 mortality-risk.
For the 'health behaviour' domain, there are discussions about how social distancing reduces physical activity, promoting the loss of muscle and endurance and the increase of frailty. 
With regard to nutrition, older-people were described as having difficulty obtaining sufficient healthy food. 
With regard to alcohol consumption, there is concern that the pandemic could lead to an increase in abuse. 
However, compared to younger-people, older-people were less likely to have increased their alcohol consumption during the pandemic. 
An ecological study found a negative correlation at the regional level between COVID-19 morbidity rates and flu vaccination take-up among older-people in the previous year. 
Therefore, low COVID-19 rates were found in places where many people had received a flu vaccination and vice versa. 
It was also found that older-people with low education levels were less likely to follow infection prevention measures than those with a higher education; likewise, men were less likely than women to follow these measures.
A total of 26 publications were assigned to the field of action 'participation and activity'. 
Of these, 19 were discussion papers, two reviews and five empirical studies.
These studies were focused on the health consequences of containment measures related to the COVID-19 pandemic, specifically social distancing and movement restrictions, for older-people. 
The majority of the papers in this field highlighted a potentially increased-risk of social isolation and loneliness for older-people (both in nursing homes as well as those living in their own homes) as a result of social distancing measures. 
Against this backdrop, some papers discussed the role of different professional groups (for example, social workers and health professionals) and public health care, as well as the potential benefits of information technologies. 
In order to avoid the social isolation of older-people, two studies analysed programmes providing telephone contact. 
The results showed a high level of satisfaction with the service. 
In contrast, a Cochrane Rapid Review found no evidence that video calls with older-people can reduce social isolation, loneliness or symptoms of depression, but the number of studies and the reliability of the evidence were low.
Generally, the pandemic was described as a challenge for older-people. 
Some publications dealt with the blanket classification of older-people as a risk-group and described their increased stigmatisation and even discrimination as possible consequences. 
In addition to social isolation, other challenges of the pandemic included financial losses, temporary loss of support and increased social inequality. 
Individual publications also described opportunities, such as the increased use and improved handling of technology, the strengthening of family networks or increased social awareness of the concerns of the elderly.
A total of 71 hits were found for the 'environmental factors' field of action. 
Of these, 57 were discussion papers, two were reviews and 12 empirical studies.
The publications considered the settings in which older-people live, receive care and how they have been altered by the pandemic. 
Several empirical contributions analysed infection outbreaks in nursing-homes and assisted living settings. 
Measures of infection control in health care-facilities were discussed and suggestions made for coping with social isolation, boredom, reduced contact and quarantine measures.
While publications outlined that, as a group, older-people have a greater need for protection and support, it remains important to prevent social isolation and ensure the provision of health care-services and social support in nursing-homes and home care-settings. 
This would require models for cross-sectoral care and the follow-up care of elderly COVID-19 patients. 
Some publications analysed the challenges health care systems were facing due to the pandemic regarding specific conditions such as hip fractures.
Health care professionals face major challenges in terms of occupational health and safety and workload, especially when caring for people with mental illness or cognitive impairment. 
Issues related to limited health care resources (including triage and prioritisation), but also palliative care, stereotyping and ageism are also addressed. 
Issues of social care and security as well as the impact of laws and regulations on older-people are also discussed.
Until 29-June-2020, contributions related to the pandemic and older-people were identified on the websites of 13 of the 14 organisations selected. 
Of the 57 contributions identified, 47 contributions from a total of ten organisations were included in this review. 
They include statements, comments and recommendations related to (1) infection protection for residents and carers in nursing-homes; (2) the equipment provided to nursing-homes (e.g. with protective equipment, IT infrastructure); (3) visiting bans and restrictions; (4) the situation facing family care­ givers in the home; and (5) the public perception of older-people in the context of the COVID-19 pandemic. 
The contributions on visiting restrictions addressed the changes that took place during the course of the relaxation of social distancing measures, which started later for nursing-home residents compared to other groups. 
In the context of visiting bans, older-people's risk of social isolation and the potential negative consequences were highlighted.
Many contributions criticised the vastly different rules that were applied depending on the federal state and the differences regarding the relaxation of restrictions in nursing-homes. 
The situation for family-caregivers was also addressed, for example the burdens caused by a lack of care-services such as day care-facilities, the difficulties for family-caregivers who work and the unique burdens placed on relatives caring for people with dementia. 
Other topics include the demand for a differentiated picture of older-people, for example with regard to the risks of SARS-CoV-2 infection, and the avoidance of ageism.
This scoping review aimed to provide an overview of international and German publications on the direct and indirect effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on the health of older-people during the first six months of 2020. 
The main aim of this evaluation was to identify gaps in the evidence concerning the initial phases of the COVID-19 pandemic and, thus, areas requiring further research. 
Based on a biopsychosocial understanding of health and guided by the public health framework of the WHO Action Plan on Ageing and Health, the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on the three fields of action (personal factors, participation/activities and environmental factors) were considered.
Only a very small proportion of the extremely high number of publications found for the first six months of the COVID-19 pandemic related specifically to older-people's health. 
The publication hits reveal serious impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic on the health and well-being of older-people in all three fields of action and the associated health domains. 
However, in the initial stages of the COVID-19 pandemic, discussion paper (e.g. statements, position papers) predominated overall, while literature reviews (4/149) and empirical studies (50/149) accounted for only a third of hits. 
The distribution of empirical studies among the fields of action was skewed, each accounting for just under 20% in the 'environmental factors' and 'participation/activities' fields of action compared to 49% in the 'personal factors' field of action.
Many of the empirical studies were based on cross sectional online surveys with small convenience samples without any claim to representativeness, case-series or individual-case studies. These studies have only limited validity since other sampling strategies are needed for older and very old-people with health impairments, for example, nursing-home residents. 
In addition, there is an urgent need for representative population-based studies of older-people living at home in different living contexts (e.g. people living alone in private households with different support and care-needs, people with different levels of care-dependency, family-caregivers) in order to assess the consequences of the pandemic for older-people. 
Here, the evaluations of epidemiological data in Germany collected at the RKI during the course of the pandemic (e.g. GEDA 2019/2020-EHIS, COSMO60+, RKI-Corona-Monitoring, MonAge/Health 65+) can contribute to describing the wellbeing and health status of older-people before and during the pandemic.
Considering the limited time period that was covered by the search (1-December-2019 to 16-June-2020), including only the initial months of the pandemic, it seems plausible that empirical data are predominantly available from countries that were heavily affected early on in the pandemic, such as China, Italy and Spain.
This is especially true for empirical studies analysing nursing-homes. 
Only two out of the 50 empirical studies came from Germany, and both analysed medical care. 
A point to take into account is that continuous data collection, which is common in other countries, for example in US nursing-homes with the Resident Assessment Instrument (RAI), does not take place in Germany. 
During the pandemic, it was either not possible to collect data in German nursing-homes or only possible under difficult conditions.
Mandatory documentation requirements were suspended in nursing-homes in Germany. 
In addition, visits and monitoring by the Health Insurance Medical Service (MDK) and internal supervision were drastically reduced. 
This also applied to visits by physicians. 
There was thus a lack of social control and information on the quality of care during the pandemic is limited. 
The same applies to the frequency with which patients were sedated, measures that deprive patients of their freedom were applied, or challenging behaviour in dementia patients occurred. 
As of the reporting date, there were no empirical data available on the situation in home-care from the perspective of those affected, care-staff or family-caregivers. 
Such studies are, however, now also available for Germany. 
An overview of the available evidence is being compiled by the Competence Network Public Health COVID-19. 
Empirical data on physical health that were identified in the research period are largely limited to the observation of the high-risk for a severe COVID-19 for particularly vulnerable-groups of older-people, including older-people in nursing-homes and frail older-people who have undergone emergency hospitalisation following a hip fracture. 
In general, the situations faced by older-people in different countries are certainly similar.
However, due to the differences in health care systems between countries, not all findings, especially regarding limited health care during the COVID-19 pandemic, are directly applicable to the situation in Germany.
Overall, men seem to run a higher-risk than women of suffering a severe COVID-19. 
Very few empirical studies on the possible indirect effects of the pandemic on the physical health of older-people were available during the research period. 
The results indicate that fears of negative health consequences due to reduced physical activity resulting from social-distancing-measures, but also due to a delayed access to medical care, could prove true. 
Initial empirical studies on the impacts of the pandemic on older-people's mental health appear not to confirm the blanket expectation of negative consequences. 
However, during the initial phases of the COVID-19 pandemic, no data on the potential longer-term consequences were yet available.
During the research period, no empirical data were available on the provision of medical care to older COVID-19 patients, nor for acute medical care or for medical and nursing follow-up care for older-people recovering from COVID-19. 
Similarly, no empirical data were identified for assessing how the pandemic impacted the quality of outpatient and inpatient medical care for multimorbid or frail older-people, or for developing quality standards. 
The extent of the short- and medium-term health consequences of the pandemic for older-people also remains unclear. 
Such consequences would include a deterioration in the physical and mental health, as well as the physical and cognitive functions, of older-people in nursing-homes and private households. 
Equally unclear is how cause-specific excess mortality will develop and what changes in mortality will occur by place of death. 
Regarding the vaccination against COVID-19, more research is needed to determine the effectiveness of the various available vaccines, especially in frail and very old-people.
A central question, which is also increasingly being discussed in international publications, is how to encourage empirical research on the above-mentioned questions, in particular research requiring personal contact. 
There will also be a need to clarify the options for analysing the consequences of COVID-19 based on the data provided by official statistics, routine data and epide miological studies. 
To meet these challenges, ideally, a publicly accessible online repository (i.e. a scientific document server) for the systematic compilation of results produced by empirical studies concerning older-people will become available, such as the one set up for long-term care (Example: LTC-COVID).
Numerous publications highlighted the fact that the COVID-19 pandemic had made social tendencies towards age discrimination visible, and this issue was addressed across fields of action and health domains. 
Blanket risk assessments and medical triage of COVID-19 patients on the basis of chronological age were mentioned, as was the indiscriminate application of measures to restrict contact and mobility. 
Some contributions also warned against paternalistic attitudes indicating expectations on how older-people should behave (e.g. the demand for self-isolation), potentially limiting their freedom of choice. 
There were calls for a social discourse that recognises the hetero­ geneity of old-people as a group and adapts medical, nursing and social care structures to the largely diverse needs of older-people and particularly vulnerable-groups (e.g. people in need of care, those who are socially isolated or physically and cognitively impaired). 
Including new technologies and digital media in a process of adaptation that leads to the creation of appropriate infrastructures and services at the individual and municipal level was seen as a challenge, but also as an opportunity.
This scoping review has its strengths and limitations.
The search was conducted for the period from 1-December-2019 to 16 June-2020 in literature archives prepared by the RKI and thus refers exclusively to the initial phase of the COVID-19 pandemic. 
The systematic search relied on the two most important medical and health science databases, PubMed and Embase, as well as several preprint servers.
The search terms were broadly discussed and agreed upon by the authors and included keywords as well as free text terms. 
To provide findings that reflect the situation in Germany, national contributions via the websites of relevant organisations were included in addition to the literature search. 
For our study objective, i.e. to provide a systematic overview of the current discourse on the situation of older-people during the initial stages of the COVID-19 pandemic, this search strategy seems suitable, but does not claim to be exhaustive. 
An important limitation of our analysis is that the quality of the studies included was not assessed.
However, the aim of the review was to take account of the topics and issues being discussed and not to assess the study results. 
Furthermore, no quality assessment tools are available to judge the quality of discussion papers, which make up the majority of the included papers.
The results of this systematic literature review up to June-2020 show that a wide range of direct and indirect effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on the health and well-being of older-people can already be expected even during the initial stages of the pandemic. 
There is an urgent need for empirical research, especially implementation and intervention research, that addresses both infection prevention and control as well as the impact of containment measures on older-people in a wide range of life situations throughout the COVID-19 pandemic. 
Individual (intrinsic) health, functional and social resources and external contextual factors, such as living circumstances, medical and nursing care and social support services, must be taken into account. 
During the COVID-19 pandemic, it has become clear that continuous and systematic health reporting for the population aged 65 and older is needed; it must also be able to take into account the heterogeneity of this age-group. 
For this purpose, a basis of data needs to be established that can be used in a low-threshold manner and en­­able timely analyses. 
The COVID-19 pandemic has shown the danger of a generalising and partly discriminatory approach regarding age. 
The reality of demographic change requires a differentiated and future-oriented approach to this topic in all areas of society.
JoHM_S10_2020_Health_Care_Chronically_Ill_COVID_19.pdf
The COVID-19 pandemic is posing major challenges to the health care sector. 
This scoping review compiles evidence concerning changes to health care-service availability and utilisation as well as possible impacts on health for selectedgroups of chronically ill-people in Germany. 
The focus is on cancer, cardiovascular diseases, diabetes mellitus and mental disorders. 
Most empirical data available concerned inpatient care and showed a clear decline in the utilisation of inpatient treatments in March and April-2020 in the areas of oncology and cardiology as well as in mental health. 
For cardiovascular emergencies such as heart attack and stroke, a decline was observed especially regarding less serious cases. 
Although there were indications of treatment delays, there was no evidence thus far that emergency care had been generally compromised due to adjustments to inpatient care capacities. 
In the outpatient setting, extensive adjustments to health care services availability were observed for all disease-groups considered. 
Overall, very limited empirical data were available. 
In particular, hardly any data were available on how changes in care impacted population health. 
There is an urgent need for continuous surveillance and evaluation based on health care and epidemiological data.
To contain the spread of SARS-CoV-2 infections and prevent overburdening the health care system, Germany, among other countries, implemented a set of non-pharmaceutical interventions (NPI) beginning in mid-March-2020. 
These included, on the one hand, measures to reduce physical contact and recommendations for social distancing. 
On the other hand, adjustments to all ar­eas of medical care were introduced. 
For example, inpatient treatment capacity, especially intensive care capacity for COVID-19 patients, was expanded and elective (postponable) surgery at all hospitals was postponed until further notice.
Results of international studies suggest that treatment figures for people with common noncommunicable diseases have decreased during the COVID-19 pandemic in many countries, at least temporarily. 
The reasons for this are manifold. 
Restrictions on the availability of care seem to have played as large a role as has a reluctance of patients to utilize services. 
A recent World Health Organization (WHO) survey of health ministries in 160 countries showed that the extent and duration of health care shortfalls are determined to a large extent by type of disease, extent of regional SARS-CoV-2 infections and by pre-existing differences in the capacities of individual countries' health care systems to provide and adapt their services.
This article reviews changes in the health care situation of patients with selected noncommunicable diseases in Germany between the beginning of March and mid-June-2020.
The focus is on cancer, cardiovascular diseases, diabetes mellitus and mental disorders. 
All these diseases require continuous and quality-assured care, some within the framework of structured disease management programmes (DMPs). 
In addition, study data show that patients with diabetes, cardiovascular diseases and some cancers may be at increased-risk of developing severe symptoms in the course of a COVID-19 infection. 
The following questions should be answered: 
(1) How have availability and uti­lisation of health care-services changed for these groups of chronically ill-people in Germany following the introduction of NPIs to control the spread of SARS-CoV-2? 
(2) Is there evidence that such measures have affected the health and well-being of chronically ill-people?
On the basis of this review, we will identify areas where there are obvious gaps in the available evidence and in which new questions arise that require continued and more in-depth work.
This review is based on the objectives and methodological approach of a scoping review as developed by Arksey and O'Malley. 
This form of systematic review serves to gain an overview of the state of knowledge in complex subject areas. 
Once the research question has been formulated, a systematic literature search is carried out and a tabular presentation and description of the identified study types, central concepts and results is prepared.
To identify relevant literature, a search was conducted for peer reviewed publications in the PubMed and COVID-19-MAP literature databases. 
To include commentaries from stakeholders, grey literature (non-publisher-bound publications) and opinions of experts, an additional keyword search in Google and Google Scholar and on the websites of selected organisations was carried out, and sources cited in reference lists were taken into account.
Our search covered the period from 1-March to 19-June-2020 (for Google Scholar from 2020 on) with a focus on publications pertaining to cancer, cardiovascular diseases, diabetes mellitus and mental disorders. 
For each of the four subject areas considered, the electronic PubMed literature database was systematically searched with four different search queries in English (the search strings used are available on request from the corresponding author).
In order to ensure the greatest possible congruence in the topic-specific search, all search queries contained a core of combined search terms for SARS-CoV-2 and COVID-19.
This core was linked with further combinations of search terms specific to the respective disease-groups. 
Simpler combinations of search terms were used for the additional searches in Google and Google Scholar and for searches on the websites of relevant professional societies, professional associations and patient organisations. 
The literature searches were stratified by disease-group and carried out by at least one person per group. 
At least two co-authors were involved in screening and selecting the literature search results for each disease-group. 
Unclear or conflicting screening decisions were discussed, and consensus was reached among the co-authors involved.
All German- and English-language contributions relating to the health care of patients with cancer, cardiovascular diseases, diabetes mellitus or mental disorders in Germany were included. 
Contributions that related exclusively to cancer screening examinations or to persons in out patient home nursing care or long-term residential care were excluded.
The included sources were stratified by disease area, and essential information was extracted and tabulated using a predefined matrix. 
In addition to bibliographic information, responsible stakeholders or institutions, key contents and results as well as the type of publication were documented. 
Regarding the type of publication, a distinction was made between empirical studies with their own data basis and non-empirical studies (e.g. commentaries, recommendations, information and communications).
All results of the literature search were summarised in two tables (Table 1 and Table 2), corresponding to the two questions posed above (changes to health care-services availability and uti­lisation, effects on health and wellbeing).
This review covers a total of 62 publications with highly uneven numbers and types of publications for each question and disease area (Table 1 and Table 2). 
A total of 40 publications were identified exclusively via the additional internet-based search. 
The remaining 22 sources (including all sources on cancer, 7 of 24 sources on cardiovascular diseases, 2 of 18 on diabetes, and 2 of 9 on mental disorders) were found via PubMed.
An additional report by the Scientific Institute of the AOK (WIdO), published shortly after the end of the search period, was nonetheless included, since preliminary results of this analysis had been published in advance during the period covered by the search.
In all disease-groups considered, major adjustments to health care availability have taken place (Table 1). 
A distinction must be made between, on the one hand, changes to the regulatory framework, such as billing modalities, and, on the other hand, recommendations by medical societies.
In the area of oncology, guidelines prioritising the urgency of surgical cancer treatments were implemented (Table 1) in order to ensure that necessary operations could be carried out promptly even when intensive care resources became limited. 
To segregate patient flows in the health care-setting and reduce the risk of infection for cancer patients, it was recommended that treatments be carried out in specialised oncological facilities where possible. 
Further recommendations involved modifying treatment plans under consideration of the individual situation. 
For example, the use of less toxic chemotherapeutic agents was suggested and, if possible, avoiding infusions in favour of orally administered drugs. 
In the field of radiotherapy, distributing the required radiation dose over fewer appointments was discussed as an option to reduce the number of contacts and to achieve a shorter treatment duration.
For patients with cardiovascular diseases, the pandemicrelated adjustments also led to restructuring of inpatient care capacities. For example, hospital beds in dedicated wards for patients with acute stroke (stroke units) or with acute chest pain (chest pain units) were partly converted into intensive care beds. 
According to the medical societies, however, the care of patients with cardiovascular diseases could still be fully assured. 
In addition, by simplifying approval procedures for rehabilitative follow-up treatment, transfers to rehabilitation clinics were accelerated. 
However, medical professional associations have reported that invasive examinations and procedures (e.g. cardiac catheterisation and stent implantation) were sometimes only carried out after a two-to-three-week waiting period and that an increasing number of patients had to visit more distant clinics. 
Moreover, cardiologists in private practices increasingly took over treatment of patients who otherwise would have been admitted as inpatients for observation. 
According to the German Society of Cardiology (DGK), the call to postpone elective operations resulted in a significantly lower number of heart operations carried out overall, including the number of more urgent elective operations that should normally have been carried out within 30-days.
Routine diabetes care was also curtailed to provide capacity for COVID-19 patients, including the postponement of elective surgical procedures (e.g. kidney transplantation and bariatric surgery). 
In addition, the changes made by the Federal Joint Committee (G-BA) to the DMP requirements guideline were particularly important for the treatment of patients with cardiac insufficiency or diabetes. 
To avoid SARS-CoV-2 infections, patient training sessions, which are normally compulsory parts of the DMP and are usually carried out in a group setting, as well as the documentation of medical examinations by a doctor, were suspended during the first to third quarters of 2020. 
In order to ensure that people with diabetes continued to receive training, video training was considered a viable option with some health insurances reimbursing such services.
Individual training and consultations remained possible, subject to compliance with hygiene regulations.
Inpatient admissions to psychiatric (day) clinics or rehabilitation facilities were restricted and appointments for treatment postponed. 
In order to protect mental health care availability for people experiencing acute crises, inpatient services were replaced by outpatient services. 
Outreach services and treatments were made available to people in need of a high level of support to cope in their daily lives, to those who have difficulty obtaining necessary medication and to those who lack sufficient social support.
Medical societies and professional associations recommended expanding telemedicine services for patients and establishing video consultation hours. 
Regarding mental health, for example, these recommendations impacted both regular psychotherapeutic treatment and crisis intervention. 
For the treatment of physical diseases, follow-up care and check-up appointments as well as tumour conferences have been conducted using telemedicine approaches. 
These changes were also made possible by expanding billing options to include telemedicine and video consultations. 
Certain certified video service providers could also be used free of charge in April/May. 
In psychiatry, new services such as telepsychiatric crisis services, special crisis hotlines or other local services were set up.
The number of hospital admissions of cancer patients insured by the statutory AOK health insurance decreased significantly in the period from mid-March to the beginning of April-2020 (calendar weeks-12-to-14) compared to the same period in the previous year (Table 1). 
The figures for oncological operations were mixed: for some cancer diagnoses (especially colorectal and lung cancers) the number of primary operations fell by around 20%, while for other diagnoses either no significant decreases or even increases (breast and cervical cancers) were recorded. 
The number of second operations (breast and colorectal cancers) fell by more than 70%. 
A survey of nuclear medicine departments and practices, mainly from Germany, concerning cancer and cardiovascular diagnostic and therapeutic procedures also showed a decline in tumour diagnostic procedures of between 14% and 58% (depending on examination type). 
In contrast, radiation therapy figures for malignant tumours have remained stable. 
For cardiovascular diseases, the same study showed an overall decrease in myocardial scintigraphy in outpatients, with a more pronounced trend for hospitals compared to radio logical practices.
Analyses of AOK insurance data showed a significant decrease in hospital admissions for acute ischemic stroke, myocardial infarction or heart failure in March/April-2020 compared to the corresponding period in the previous year. 
In a more in-depth analysis, this decrease was particularly marked for mild-cases of heart attack and stroke.
The same applied to the admission of patients with an abdominal aortic aneurysm. 
In concordance with these results, decreases in inpatient treatments for heart attack and in acute treatments for heart failure and arrhythmias were reported for the early phase of the pandemic based on data from a second statutory health insurance company (the Deutsche Angestellten Krankenkasse, DAK) and two hospital networks. 
One university hospital in southern Germany recorded significantly fewer admissions due to minor acute heart attacks (those without changes in the ECG typical of an infarction (NSTEMI)) in March/April-2020 than during the same period in 2017, 2018 and 2019.
The number of admissions due to more severe acute myocardial infarction with ECG changes typical of an infarction (STEMI) did not change, however. 
Consistently fewer emergency treatments than in previous years were also observed for patients with minor stroke or transient ischaemic attack (TIA). 
This is shown by analyses of data from 36 regional stroke centres in the Ruhr area and from several stroke units at university hospitals, as well as from the Alfried Krupp Hospital in Essen. 
In addition, a decline in neurovascular emergencies was also observed at the Charité Berlin during the early phase of the pandemic.
Furthermore, the associations of statutory health insurance physicians and professional associations have reported a reduction in the number of consultations in oncology and cardiology practices, with similar developments being reported in the areas of endocrinology and diabetology. 
Many professional societies as well as patient organisations urged patients not to neglect the treatment of their chronic disease for fear of infection and, for example, to schedule and attend follow-up and treatment appointments. 
There were also warnings against independently discontinuing medication such as ACE inhibitors, which are used to treat high blood pressure and were for a while suspected of increasing the risk of a severe course of COVID-19.
The WIdO institute's analysis of AOK insurance data showed a 49% decrease in inpatient treatment for mental and behavioural disorders during the stricter phases of the lockdown compared to the previous year. 
The Central Institute of Mental Health in Mannheim recorded a 27% decrease in the use of its emergency service for people with mental health issues, particularly for affective disorders. 
However, the German Association for Psychiatry, Psychotherapy and Psychosomatics (DGPPN) reported that the 450 psychiatric outpatient clinics in Germany observed an increase in the number of patients from residential and semiresidential care-facilities.
So far, very little empirical data exist concerning the impacts on health due to the observed changes to health care-service availability and uti­lisation. 
Instead there are predominantly opinions on the feared consequences of delayed diagnosis and therapy, as well as results from surveys of patients and doctors (Table 2).
Cancer patients often expressed concerns about potentially inadequate or delayed treatment. 
The possibility of becoming infected and the risk of suffering a severe course of COVID-19 due to cancer or therapy-related immunosuppression have also caused uncertainty. 
Access restrictions for visitors and accompanying persons of patients in inpatient and outpatient care were considered a burden. 
In oncological clinical research, there were concerns about delays in recruitment of patients to ongoing clinical therapy trials. 
These play an important role in providing care to people with rare cancers in particular. 
A task force formed by the German Cancer Aid, the German Cancer Society and the German Cancer Research Centre (DKFZ) warned of a 'wave' of oncological treatments as a result of the lockdown and changes made necessary by the pandemic.
According to Germany's Association of Cardiologists in Private Practice (BNK), some cardiology patients who cancelled appointments were later treated as emergencies.
Furthermore, the German Cardiac Society has also reported an increase in the incidence of complications typical of untreated heart attacks. 
Based on data from the University Hospital of Ulm, the blood values of heart attack patients, which can provide information about the extent of the organ damage caused, during the early stages of the pandemic were compared with those from the corresponding periods in the years 2017 to 2019. 
It was found that in the current year higher average concentrations of high-sensitivity troponin T (hsTnT) were measured than in previous years, which may indicate a delayed onset of therapy. 
The Charité hospital in Berlin also found indications of delayed treatment for patients with chronic subdural haematoma (collection of blood between the outer covering of the brain (dura mater) and the brain). 
For example, patients admitted during the early stages of the pandemic showed more severe symptoms and a worse prognosis in the hospital setting.
Various uncertainties were observed among people with diabetes. 
Patients with diabetes were worried that they might face a higher-risk of developing and suffering a severer course of COVID-19 and that they might be infected with SARS-CoV-2 during a doctor's appointment.
Patients were afraid of shortages in diabetes medication and reported problems with the contact-free transmission of therapy data to their diabetology practice and uncertainty about how to adjust insulin requirements under changing everyday conditions. 
The risk of stigmatising-people with diabetes as a COVID-19 risk-group by excluding them from public life was also discussed.
Our research on the changes to the health care situation for people with selected noncommunicable diseases in Germany during the first months of the COVID-19 pandemic identified only a few empirical studies that were almost exclusively related to inpatient care. 
The analyses of AOK-insurance data showed a clear decline in inpatient admissions for oncology in March/April-2020. 
Other European countries have reported similar declines in hospital admissions and registered cancer diagnoses since mid February. 
For cardiovascular diseases, in line with international reports, both AOK data and data from cardiological and neurological clinical departments indicate a decline in the number of patients receiving emergency medical or acute diagnostic care in the same period compared to the previous year. 
This was associated primarily with a decrease in the number of mild heart attacks and strokes as well as transient ischaemic attacks. 
According to an analysis of data from 36 emergency departments in Germany, a sharper decrease was likewise observed in less urgent compared to more urgent emergency treatments following implementation of lockdown-measures.
In conjunction with some evidence from international studies, this pattern can be interpreted as indicating a substantial role of patients reducing or delaying utilisation of health care-services. 
An expert report on the effects of the COVID-19 Hospital Relief Act also supports such a hypothesis. 
In their final report, the members of the committee conclude that a patient's decision to go ahead with treatment or not has played a greater role in explaining the decline in inpatient treatment figures in 2020 compared to the same period last year than hospitals cancelling treatment. 
For example, in the period from January to May-2020, the proportion of emergency hospital admissions was higher for the first time than the proportion of non-emergency admissions, and the number of less urgent treatments decreased more than more urgent ones.
However, our review only identified two empirical studies for Germany indicating a delayed utilisation of medical care for heart attack and chronic subdural haematoma.
Moreover, only a few of the articles identified in the search period discussed outpatient care. 
According to reports from the National Association of Statutory Health Insurance Physicians (KBV), significantly fewer appointments in oncological and cardiological practices were made during the early stages of the pandemic. 
An analysis by the Central Research Institute of Ambulatory Health Care in Germany (Zi) has confirmed these observations, but was published outside the review period. 
According to this analysis, treatment figures in oncological, cardiological, neurological, endocrinological, psychiatric and psychotherapeutic practices fell in the course of March-2020 by up to 40% in the last week of March compared to the same period in the previous year.
Our research identified no results from either quantitative or qualitative studies on the reasons for a delayed uti­lisation of inpatient or emergency medical treatment in Germany.
We were also unable to identify any population-based quantitative or qualitative studies that report whether and why outpatient appointments did not take place (i.e. whether they were cancelled or postponed, either by the doctor's practice due to lack of capacity or by the patients themselves). 
This question will require further research. 
Some reports identified by our review indicated that (partial) closures of and limited admissions to hospitals had to be compensated by outpatient services, for example in outpatient cardiology and psychotherapy.
Results from ongoing research projects monitoring outpatient care since March-2020, such as COVI-Prim (Accompanying Monitoring of Primary Care in General Practitioners' Practices during the COVID-19 Pandemic), would be important for gaining a deeper insight into the complex requirements that outpatient care providers had to meet, especially in the early stages of the pandemic.
Ongoing analyses of the developments of health care availability and utilisation in Germany for specific-groups of chronically ill persons are important, especially if a new spike in cases were to develop in the course of the pandemic. 
For example, professional societies in the field of oncology began, at an early stage, to develop a wide range of recommendations to adapt procedures in order to avoid  interruptions to diagnostic and therapeutic-measures that cannot be postponed while minimising the risk of infection.
One potential problem was that a backlog of patients could still develop, partly because older patients in particular may have avoided the health care system, despite symptoms, and thus not have received prompt diagnostics and treatment. 
Temporary suspension (mammography screening) or reduced uti­lisation of cancer screening examinations could also contribute to this.
Encouraged by recommendations from medical societies and associations as well as new billing options, telemedical care services for patients with chronic physical illnesses and mental disorders were expanded. 
There is great potential for further development of these options beyond the end of the current pandemic.
Further analysis is required to determine the extent to which these services are accepted and used by medical professionals and patients. 
Such analyses should identify barriers to utilisation due to deficiencies in technical equipment and expertise as well as the inherent limits of such services.
According to the results of surveys, expert assessments and reports from the field, the COVID-19 pandemic has not led to critical bottlenecks in oncological care in Germany, and the system has overall been perceived as being relatively adaptable. 
Probably only a small number of time-critical therapies were postponed. 
In contrast to European regions with high COVID-19-case numbers, no fundamental restructuring of emergency care for stroke patients in Germany has so far appeared to have occurred.
According to the medical societies, the timely diagnosis and treatment of patients with acute cardiovascular events has at no time been at risk. 
Despite the closure of diabetes units as part of the adaptations of inpatient care capacities in the context of the pandemic, it has been assumed for the time being that the care of diabetes patients could be largely maintained, at least in paediatrics. 
The health care situation for people with mental disorders cannot yet be fully assessed.
The key question as to the extent to which patients with chronic diseases have suffered damage to their health as a result of pandemic-related changes to health care availability and reduction in uti­lisation cannot be answered at present. 
Our review identified only two empirical studies that found suggestive evidence of delayed utilisation followed by greater disease severity in patients with heart attacks and elderly-people with chronic subdural haematoma.
We cannot rule out that delays in diagnostic assessments and follow-up appointments, also due to changes in the utilisation patterns of patients, have led to a shift of diagnosis to later disease stages. 
Such a shift could lead to poorer treatment outcomes with increases in acute complications or longer-term sequelae. 
For example, an article published after the literature review period showed that the frequency of diabetic ketoacidoses in children and adolescents with newly diagnosed type one diabetes was higher during the early stages of the pandemic than in the comparable period of previous years, which could be due to a delay in diagnosis. 
As a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, experts expect an increase in mental disorders such as adjustment disorders, anxiety disorders, depression and trauma disorders to which the health care system will have to respond in the longer term. 
Based on past experiences, the German Association for Psychiatry, Psychotherapy and Psychosomatics also points out that increased suicide rates must be anticipated, especially if the economic downturn caused by the pandemic continues to worsen.
In summary, these results show a considerable need for research both on the causes and the consequences of changes to the availability and utilisation of health care services by chronically ill-people in Germany.
One of the strengths of the present review is that it included not only a structured search in PubMed but also additional searches via the search engines Google and Google Scholar as well as the websites of selected organisations. 
The expanded search enabled us to identify the vast majority of contributions, including important reports from the WIdO institute on changes in hospital case numbers in March/April-2020 as well as opinions, recommendations for action and information from medical societies and professional organisations. 
In addition, the searches were specifically targeted at four common noncommunicable disease-groups for which changes to health care availability and utilisation related to the pandemic are particularly relevant. 
The most important limitation is that gaps remain in the review; for example, unpublished results, ongoing work or work in publication were not systematically researched by contacting the relevant institutions. 
Similarly, as a scoping review, only a categorisation according to type and content of cited sources was conducted, with no evaluation regarding scientific validity. 
Our searches only covered the period between March and June-2020, meaning that results published outside the search period could not be included in the systematic overview, even if they refer to the period between the beginning of March and mid-June-2020.
In summary, during the early stages of the COVID-19 pandemic the number of people treated for cancer, cardiovascular diseases, diabetes mellitus and mental disorders decreased in Germany. 
In order to learn from this for future crises, the roles played by changes to health care availability and declines in utilisation will require further clarification. 
In order to make necessary adjustments quickly, it will be important to continue monitoring the health care situation throughout the ongoing course of the pandemic. 
Only a targeted monitoring of the developments in outpatient and inpatient care can shed light on adverse and possibly long-term consequences for patient's health and well-being due to changes in the health care situation. 
At the population level, the close monitoring of the development of cause-specific morbidity and mortality will require a reliable, timely and continuously available data basis.
